KAGEKIYO



A PLAY IN ONE ACT, BY MOTOKIYO


PERSONS OF THE PLAY


SHITE                         Kagekiyo old and blind

TSURE                         Hime his daughter, called also Hitomaru

TOMO                          Her attendant

WAKI                          A villager

CHORUS

The scene is in Hinga.



KAGEKIYO



HIME AND TOMO (chanting)
What should it be; the body of dew, wholly at the mercy of wind?

HIME

  I am a girl named Hitomaru from Kamega-engayatsu,
  My father, Akushichi-bioye Kagekiyo,
  Fought by the side of Heike,
  And is therefore hated by Genji.
  He was banished to Miyazaki in Hinga,
  To waste out the end of his life.
  Though I am unaccustomed to travel,
  I will try to go to my father.

HIME AND TOMO (describing the journey as they walk across the bridge and
the stage)
  Sleeping with the grass for our pillow,
  The dew has covered our sleeves.
(singing)
  Of whom shall I ask my way
  As I go out from Tagami province?
  Of whom in Totomi?
  I crossed the bay in a small hired boat
  And came to Yatsuhashi in Mikawa:
  Ah when shall I see the City-on-the-cloud?

TOMO
As we have come so fast, we are now in Miyazaki of Hinga.

It is here you should ask for your father.

KAGEKIYO (in another corner of the stage)
Sitting at the gate of the pine wood, I wear out the end of my years. I
cannot see the clear light, I know not how the time passes. I sit here in
this dark hovel, with one coat for the warm and the cold, and my body is
but a frame-work of bones.

CHORUS
May as well be a priest with black sleeves. Now having left the world in
sorrow, I look upon my withered shape. There is no one to pity me now.

HIME
Surely no one can live in that ruin, and yet a voice sounds from it. A
beggar perhaps, let us take a few steps and see.

KAGEKIYO
My eyes will not show it me, yet the autumn wind is upon us.

HIME
The wind blows from an unknown past, and spreads our doubts through the
world. The wind blows, and I have no rest, nor any place to find quiet.

KAGEKIYO
Neither in the world of passion, nor in the world of colour, nor in the
world of non-colour, is there any such place of rest; beneath the one sky
are they all. Whom shall I ask, and how answer?

TOMO
Shall I ask the old man by the thatch?

KAGEKIYO
Who are you?

TOMO
Where does the exile live?

KAGEKIYO
What exile?

TOMO
One who is called Akushichi-bioye Kagekiyo, a noble who fought under
Heike.

KAGEKIYO
Indeed? I have heard of him, but I am blind, I have not looked in his
face. I have heard of his wretched condition and pity him. You had better
ask for him at the next place.

TOMO (to Hime)
It seems that he is not here, shall we ask further?
(they pass on)

KAGEKIYO
Strange, I feel that woman who has just passed is the child of that blind
man. Long ago I loved a courtezan in Atsuta, one time when I was in that
place. But I thought our girl-child would be no use to us, and I left her
with the head man in the valley of Kamega-engayatsu; and now she has gone
by me and spoken, although she does not know who I am.

CHORUS

  Although I have heard her voice,
  The pity is that I cannot see her.
  And I have let her go by
  Without divulging my name.
  This is the true love of a father.

TOMO (at further side of the stage)
Is there any native about?

VILLAGER
What do you want with me?

TOMO
Do you know where the exile lives?

VILLAGER
What exile is it you want?

TOMO
Akushichi-bioye  Kagekiyo, a noble  of Heike's party.

VILLAGER
Did you not pass an old man under the edge of the mountain, as you were
coming that way?

TOMO
A blind beggar in a thatched cottage.

VILLAGER
That fellow was Kagekiyo. What ails the lady? she shivers.

TOMO
A question you might well ask. She is the exile's daughter. She wanted to
see her father once more, and so came hither to seek him. Will you take
us to Kagekiyo?

VILLAGER
Bless my soul! Kagekiyo's daughter. Come, come, never mind, young miss.
Now I will tell you, Kagekiyo went blind in both eyes, and so he shaved
his crown and called himself 'The Blind man of Hinga.' He begs a bit from
the passers, and the likes of us keep him; he'd be ashamed to tell you
his name. However, I'll come along with you, and then I'll call out,
'Kagekiyo;' and if he comes, you can see him and have a word with him.
Let us along, (they cross the stage, and the villager calls) Kagekiyo, Oh
there, Kagekiyo!

KAGEKIYO
Noise, noise! Someone came from my home to call me, but I sent them on. I
couldn't be seen like this. Tears like the thousand lines in a rain
storm, bitter tears soften my sleeve. Ten thousand things rise in a
dream, and I wake in this hovel, wretched, just a nothing in the wide
world. How can I answer when they call me by my right name?

CHORUS
Do not call out the name he had in his glory. You will move the bad blood
in his heart, (then taking up Kagekiyo's thought) I am angry.

KAGEKIYO
Living here....

CHORUS (going on with Kagekiyo's thought)
I go on living here, hated by the people in power. A blind man without
his staff, I am deformed, and therefore speak evil; excuse me.

KAGEKIYO
My eyes are darkened.

CHORUS
Though my eyes are dark I understand the thoughts of another. I
understand at a word. The wind comes down from the pine trees on the
mountain, and snow comes down after the wind. The dream tells of my
glory, I am loth to wake from the dream. I hear the waves running in the
evening tide, as when I was with Heike. Shall I act out the old ballad?

KAGEKIYO (to the villager)
I had a weight on my mind, I spoke to you very harshly, excuse me.

VILLAGER
You're always like that, never mind it. Has anyone been here to see you?

KAGEKIYO
No one but you.

VILLAGER
Go on, that is not true. Your daughter was here. Why couldn't you tell
her the truth, she being so sad and so eager. I have brought her back
now. Come now, speak with your father. Come along.

HIME
O, O, I came such a long journey, under rain, under wind, wet with dew,
over the frost; you do not see into my heart. It seems that a father's
love goes when the child is not worth it.

KAGEKIYO
I meant to keep it concealed, but now they have found it all out. I shall
drench you with the dew of my shame, you who are young as a flower. I
tell you my name, and that we are father and child; yet I thought this
would put dishonour upon you, and therefore I let you pass. Do not hold
it against me.

CHORUS
At first I was angry that my friends would no longer come near me. But
now I have come to a time when I could not believe that even a child of
my own would seek me out.

 (singing)
  Upon all the boats of the men of Heike's faction
  Kagekiyo was the fighter most in call,
  Brave were his men, cunning sailors,
  And now even the leader
  Is worn out and dull as a horse.

VILLAGER (to Kagekiyo)
Many a fine thing is gone, sir; your daughter would like to ask you....

KAGEKIYO
What is it?

VILLAGER
She has heard of your old fame in Uashima. Would you tell her the ballad?

KAGEKIYO
Towards the end of the third month it was, in the third year of Juei. We
men of Heike were in ships, the men of Genji were on land. Their
war-tents stretched on the shore. We awaited decision. And Noto-no-Kami
Noritsune said: 'Last year in the hills of Harima, & in Midzushima, and
in Hiyodorigoye of Bitchiu, we were defeated time and again, for
Yoshitsine is tactful and cunning.' 'Is there any way we can beat them?'
(Kagekiyo thought in his mind) 'This Hangan Yoshitsine is neither god nor
a devil, at the risk of my life I might do it.' So he took leave of
Noritsune and led a party against the shore, and all the men of Genji
rushed on them.

CHORUS
Kagekiyo cried, 'You are haughty.' His armour caught every turn of the
sun. He drove them four ways before them.

KAGEKIYO (excited and crying out)
Samoshiya! Run, cowards!

CHORUS
He thought, how easy this killing. He rushed with his spear-haft gripped
under his arm. He cried out, 'I am Kagekiyo of the Heike.' He rushed on
to take them. He pierced through the helmet vizards of Miyonoya. Miyonoya
fled twice, and again; and Kagekiyo cried, 'You shall not escape me!' He
leaped and wrenched off his helmet. 'Eya!' The vizard broke and remained
in his hand and Miyonoya still fled afar, and afar, and he looked back
crying in terror, 'How terrible, how heavy your arm!' And Kagekiyo called
at him, 'How tough the shaft of your neck is!' And they both laughed out
over the battle, and went off each his own way.

CHORUS
These were the deeds of old, but oh, to tell them! To be telling them
over now in his wretched condition. His life in the world is weary, he is
near the end of his course. 'Go back,' he would say to his daughter.
'Pray for me when I am gone from the world, for I shall then count upon
you as we count on a lamp in the darkness ... we who are blind.' 'I will
stay,' she said. Then she obeyed him, and only one voice is left.

We tell this for the remembrance. Thus were the parent and child.


END
