THE NEWLY-MARRIED COUPLE

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

     The FATHER.
     The MOTHER.
     LAURA, their daughter.
     AXEL, her husband.
     MATHILDE, her friend.




ACT I

(SCENE.--A handsomely furnished, carpeted room, with a door at the back
leading to a lobby. The FATHER is sitting on a couch on the left-hand
side, in the foreground, reading a newspaper. Other papers are lying on
a small table in front of him. AXEL is on another couch drawn up in a
similar position on the right-hand side. A newspaper, which he is not
reading, is lying on his knee. The MOTHER is sitting, sewing, in an
easy-chair drawn up beside a table in the middle of the room.)

[LAURA enters.]

Laura. Good morning, mother! (Kisses her.)

Mother. Good morning, dear. Have you slept well?

Laura. Very well, thanks. Good morning, dad! (Kisses him.)

Father. Good morning, little one, good morning. Happy and in good
spirits?

Laura. Very. (Passes in front of AXEL.) Good morning, Axel! (Sits down
at the table, opposite her mother.)

Axel. Good morning.

Mother. I am very sorry to say, my child, that I must give up going to
the ball with you to-night. It is such a long way to go, in this cold
spring weather.

Father (without looking up from his paper). Your mother is not well. She
was coughing in the night.

Laura. Coughing again?

Father. Twice. (The MOTHER coughs, and he looks up.) There, do you hear
that? Your mother must not go out, on any account.

Laura. Then I won't go, either.

Father. That will be just as well; it is such raw weather. (To the
MOTHER.) But you have no shawl on, my love; where is your shawl?

Laura. Axel, fetch mother's shawl; it is hanging in the lobby. (AXEL
goes out into the lobby.)

Mother. We are not really into spring yet. I am surprised the stove is
not lit in here.

Laura (to AXEL, who is arranging the shawl over the MOTHER'S shoulders).
Axel, ring the bell and let us have a fire. (He does so, and gives the
necessary instructions to the Servant.)

Mother. If none of us are going to the ball, we ought to send them a
note. Perhaps you would see to that, Axel?

Axel. Certainly--but will it do for us to stay away from this ball?

Laura. Surely you heard father say that mother has been coughing in the
night.

Axel. Yes, I heard; but the ball is being given by the only friend I
have in these parts, in your honour and mine. We are the reason of the
whole entertainment--surely we cannot stay away from it?

Laura. But it wouldn't be any pleasure to us to go without mother.

Axel. One often has to do what is not any pleasure.

Laura. When it is a matter of duty, certainly. But our first duty is to
mother, and we cannot possibly leave her alone at home when she is ill.

Axel. I had no idea she was ill.

Father (as he reads). She coughed twice in the night. She coughed only a
moment ago.

Mother. Axel means that a cough or two isn't illness, and he is quite
right.

Father (still reading). A cough may be a sign of something very serious.
(Clears his throat.) The chest--or the lungs. (Clears his throat again.)
I don't think I feel quite the thing myself, either.

Laura. Daddy dear, you are too lightly clothed.

Mother. You dress as if it were summer--and it certainly isn't that.

Father. The fire will burn up directly. (Clears his throat again.) No,
not quite the thing at all.

Laura. Axel! (He goes up to her.) You might read the paper to us till
breakfast is ready.

Axel. Certainly. But first of all I want to know if we really are not to
go to the ball?

Laura. You can go, if you like, and take our excuses.

Mother. That wouldn't do. Remember you are married now.

Axel. That is exactly why it seems to me that Laura cannot stay at home.
The fact that she is my wife ought to have most weight with her now; and
this ball is being given for us two, who have nothing the matter with
us, besides being mainly a dance for young people--

Mother. And not for old folk.

Laura. Thank you; mother has taken to dancing again since I have grown
up. I have never been to a ball without mother's leading off the dances.

Mother. Axel apparently thinks it would have been much better if I had
not done so.

Father (as he reads). Mother dances most elegantly.

Axel. Surely I should know that, seeing how often I have had the honour
of leading off with mother. But on this occasion forty or fifty people
have been invited, a lot of trouble and expense incurred and a lot of
pleasure arranged, solely for our sakes. It would be simply wicked to
disappoint them.

Father (still reading). We can give a ball for them, in return.

Mother. All the more as we owe heaps of people an invitation.

Laura. Yes, that will be better; we have more room here, too. (A pause.)

Axel (leaning over LAURA'S chair). Think of your new ball dress--my
first present to you. Won't that tempt you? Blue muslin, with silver
stars all over it? Shall they not shine for the first time to-night?

Laura (smiling). No, there would be no shine in the stars if mother were
not at the dance.

Axel. Very well--I will send our excuses. (Turns to go out.)

Father (still reading). Perhaps it will be better for me to write. (AXEL
stops.)

Mother. Yes, you will do it best.

[MATHILDE comes in, followed by a Servant, who throws the doors open.]

Mathilde. Breakfast is ready.

Father (taking his wife's arm). Keep your shawl on, my dear; it is cold
in the hall. (They go out.)

Axel (as he offers LAURA his arm and leads her towards the door). Let me
have a word with you, before we follow them!

Laura. But it is breakfast time.

Axel (to MATHILDE, who is standing behind them waiting). Do you mind
going on? (MATHILDE goes out, followed by the Servant. AXEL turns to
LAURA.) Will nothing move you? Go with me to this dance!

Laura. I thought that was what you were going to say.

Axel. For _my_ sake!

Laura. But you saw for yourself that mother and father do not wish it?

Axel. _I_ wish it.

Laura. When mother and father do not?

Axel. Then I suppose you are their daughter in the first place, and my
wife only in the second?

Laura (with a laugh). Well, that is only natural.

Axel. No, it is not natural; because two days ago you promised to
forsake your father and your mother and follow me.

Laura (laughing). To the ball? I certainly never promised that.

Axel. Wherever I wish.

Laura. But you mustn't wish that, Axel darling--because it is quite
impossible.

Axel. It is quite possible, if you like to do it.

Laura. Yes, but I don't like.

Axel. That same day you also heard that a man is his wife's lord and
master. You must be willing to leave them, if I wish it; it was on those
terms that you gave me your hand, you obstinate little woman.

Laura. It was just so as to be able to be always with father and mother,
that I did it.

Axel. So that was it. Then you have no wish to be always with me?

Laura. Yes--but not to forsake them.

Axel. Never?

Laura. Never? (Softly.) Yes, some day--when I must.

Axel. When must you?

Laura. When? When mother and father--are gone. But why think about such
things?

Axel. Don't cry, darling! Listen to me. Would you never be willing to
follow me--until they have left us?

Laura. No!--how can you think so?

Axel. Ah, Laura, you don't love me.

Laura. Why do you say such a thing? You only want to make me unhappy.

Axel. You don't even know what love is.

Laura. I don't?--That is not kind of you.

Axel. Tell me what it is then, sweetheart!

Laura (kissing him). Now you mustn't talk about it any more; because you
know, if you do, I shall have red eyes, and then father and mother will
want to know why they are red, and I shall not be able to tell them, and
it will be very embarrassing.

Axel. Better a few tears now than many later on.

Laura. But what have I done to cry about?

Axel. You have given your hand without giving your heart with it; your
tongue said "yes," but not your will; you have given yourself without
realising what it means. And so, what ought to be the greatest and
purest happiness in my life begins to turn to sorrow, and the future
looks dark.

Laura. Oh, dear!--and is all this my fault?

Axel. No, it is my own fault. I have been deluding myself with
flattering hopes. I thought it would be so easy a matter for my love
to awaken yours; but I cannot make you understand me. Every way I have
tried has failed. So I must call up my courage, and try the last chance.

Laura. The last chance? What do you mean?

Axel. Laura, I can't tell you how dearly I love you!

Laura. If you did, you wouldn't hurt me. I never hurt you.

Axel. Well, give in to me in just this one thing, and I shall believe it
is the promise of more. Go with me to the ball!

Laura. You know I cannot do that!

Axel. Ah! then I dare not delay any longer!

Laura. You frighten me! You look so angry.

Axel. No, no. But things cannot go on like this any longer. I can't
stand it!

Laura. Am I so bad, then? No one ever told me so before.

Axel. Don't cry, my dainty little fairy. You have nothing to blame
yourself for--except for being so bewitchingly sweet whether you are
laughing or crying. You exhale sweetness like a flower. I want your
influence to pervade every place where I am, to distract me when I am
moody and laugh away my longings. Hush, hush--no red eyes. Let no one
see that. Here is your mother coming--no, it is Mathilde.

[Enter MATHILDE.]

Mathilde. Your coffee is getting cold.

Axel. We are just coming. At least, Laura is. I want to speak to you for
a moment, if I may.

Mathilde. To me?

Axel. If you will allow me.

Mathilde. By all means.

Laura. But you are coming in to breakfast?

Axel. In a moment, darling.

Laura. And you are not angry with me any longer?

Axel (following her). I never was that. I never could be!

Laura. I am so glad! (Runs out.)

Mathilde. What is it you want?

Axel. Can you keep a secret?

Mathilde. No.

Axel. You won't?

Mathilde. No.

Axel. You won't share any more confidences with me? (Takes her hand.)
You used to--

Mathilde (drawing back her hand and moving away from him). Yes, I used
to.

Axel. Why won't you any longer? (Goes up to her.) What is changed?

Mathilde. You. You are married now.

Axel. No, that is just what I am not.

Mathilde. Indeed.

Axel. You have sharp eyes. You must have seen that.

Mathilde. I thought it was all just as you wished.

Axel. You are giving me very abrupt answers. Have I offended you?

Mathilde. What makes you ask that?

Axel. Because lately you have avoided me. Remember how kind you were
to me once--indeed, that I owe you everything. It was through you, you
know, that I got at her. I had to make assignations with you, in order
to meet her. I had to offer you my arm so as to be able to give her the
other, and to talk to you so that she might hear my voice. The little
darling thought she was doing you a service--

Mathilde. When as a matter of fact it was I that was doing her one--

Axel. Yes, and without suspecting it! That was the amusing part of it.

Mathilde. Yes, that was the amusing part of it.

Axel. But soon people began to say that you and I were secretly engaged,
and that we were making a stalking-horse of Laura; so for her sake I had
to bring matters to a head rather quickly.

Mathilde. Yes, you took a good many people by surprise.

Axel. Including even yourself, I believe--not to mention the old folk
and Laura. But the worst of it is that I took my own happiness by
surprise, too.

Mathilde. What do you mean?

Axel. Of course I knew Laura was only a child; but I thought she would
grow up when she felt the approach of love. But she has never felt its
approach; she is like a bud that will not open, and I cannot warm the
atmosphere. But you could do that--you, in whom she has confided all her
first longings--you, whose kind heart knows so well how to sacrifice its
happiness for others. You know you are to some extent responsible, too,
for the fact that the most important event in her life came upon her a
little unpreparedly; so you ought to take her by the hand and guide her
first steps away from her parents and towards me--direct her affections
towards me--

Mathilde. I? (A pause.)

Axel. Won't you?

Mathilde. No--

Axel. But why not? You love her, don't you?

Mathilde. I do; but this is a thing--

Axel.--that you can do quite well! For you are better off than the rest
of us--you have many more ways of reaching a person's soul than we have.
Sometimes when we have been discussing something, and then you have
given your opinion, it has reminded me of the refrains to the old
ballads, which sum up the essence of the whole poem in two lines.

Mathilde. Yes, I have heard you flatter before.

Axel. I flatter? Why, what I have just asked you to do is a clearer
proof than anything else how great my--

Mathilde. Stop, stop! I won't do it!

Axel. Why not? At least be frank with me!

Mathilde. Because--oh, because--(Turns away.)

Axel. But what has made you so unkind? (MATHILDE stops for a moment, as
though she were going to answer; then goes hurriedly out.) What on earth
is the matter with her? Has anything gone wrong between her and Laura?
Or is it something about the house that is worrying her? She is too
level-headed to be disturbed by trifles.--Well, whatever it is, it must
look after itself; I have something else to think about. If the one of
them _can't_ understand me, and the other _won't_, and the old couple
neither can nor will, I must act on my own account--and the sooner the
better! Later on, it would look to other people like a rupture. It must
be done now, before we settle down to this state of things; for if we
were to do that, it would be all up with us. To acquiesce in such
an unnatural state of affairs would be like crippling one's self on
purpose. I am entangled hand and foot here in the meshes of a net
of circumspection. I shall have to sail along at "dead slow" all my
life--creep about among their furniture and their flowers as warily as
among their habits. You might just as well try to stand the house on its
head as to alter the slightest thing in it. I daren't move!--and it is
becoming unbearable. Would it be a breach of a law of nature to move
this couch a little closer to the wall, or this chair further away from
it? And has it been ordained from all eternity that this table must
stand just where it does? _Can_ it be shifted? (Moves it.) It actually
can! And the couch, too. Why does it stand so far forward? (Pushes it
back.) And why are these chairs everlastingly in the way? This one shall
stand there--and this one there. (Moves them.) I will have room for my
legs; I positively believe I have forgotten how to walk. For a whole
year I have hardly heard the sound of my own footstep--or of my own
voice; they do nothing but whisper and cough here. I wonder if I have
any voice left? (Sings.)

            "Bursting every bar and band,
             My fetters will I shatter;
             Striding out, with sword in hand,
             Where the fight"--

(He stops abruptly, at the entrance of the FATHER, the MOTHER,
LAURA and MATHILDE, who have come hurriedly from the breakfast table. A
long pause.)

Laura. Axel, dear!

Mathilde. What, all by himself?

Mother. Do you think you are at a ball?

Father. And playing the part of musician as well as dancer?

Axel. I am amusing myself.

Father. With our furniture?

Axel. I only wanted to see if it was possible to move it.

Mother. If it was possible to move it?

Laura. But what were you shouting about?

Axel. I only wanted to try if I had any voice left.

Laura. If you had any voice left?

Mother. There is a big wood near the house, where you can practise that.

Father. And a waterfall--if you are anxious to emulate Demosthenes.

Laura. Axel, dear--are you out of your mind?

Axel. No, but I think I soon shall be.

Mother. Is there anything wrong?

Axel. Yes, a great deal.

Mother. What is it? Some unpleasant news by post?

Axel. No, not that--but I am unhappy.

Mother. Two days after your wedding?

Father. You have a very odd way of showing it.

Axel. I am taken like that sometimes.

Mother. But what is it? Evidently you are not as happy as we hoped you
would be. Confide in us, Axel; we are your parents now, you know.

Axel. It is something I have been thinking about for a long time, but
have not had the courage to mention.

Mother. Why? Aren't we good to you?

Axel. You are much too good to me.

Father. What do you mean by that?

Axel. That everything is made far too smooth for me here; my faculties
get no exercise; I cannot satisfy my longing for activity and
conflict--nor my ambition.

Father. Dear me! What do you want, if you please?

Axel. I want to work for myself, to owe my position in life to my own
efforts--to become something.

Father. Really.--What a foolish idea! (Moves towards the door.)

Mother. But an idea we must take an interest in. He is our child's
husband now, remember. What do you want to be, my boy? Member of
Parliament?

Axel. No; but my uncle, who has about the largest legal practice in
these parts, offered long ago to hand it over to me.

Mother. But you wouldn't be able to look after it from here, would you,
Axel?

Father (at the door). A ridiculous idea!--Come back to breakfast. (Turns
to go.)

Mother. That is true, isn't it? You couldn't look after it from here?

Axel. No; but I can move into town.

All. Move into town? (A pause. The FATHER turns back from the door.)

Father. That is still more impossible, of course.

Mother. There must be something at the bottom of this. Is anything
worrying you? (Lowering her voice.) Are you in debt?

Axel. No, thanks to the kindness of you two. You have freed me from
that.

Mother. Then what is it, Axel? You have been so, strange lately--what is
it, my dear boy?

Father. Nonsensical ideas--probably his stomach is disordered. Remember
the last time I ate lobster!--Come along in and have a glass of sherry,
and you will forget all about it.

Axel. No, it isn't a thing one can forget. It is always in my
thoughts--more and more insistently. I must have work for my mind--some
outlet for my ambition. I am bored here.

Mother. Two days after your wedding!

Father. Set to work then, for heaven's sake! What is there to hinder
you? Would you like to take charge of one of my farms? Or to start some
improvements on the estate?--or anything you please! I have no doubt you
have ideas, and I will provide the money--only do not let us have any of
this fuss!

Axel. But then I shall be indebted to you for everything, and shall feel
dependent.

Father. So you would rather feel indebted to your uncle?

Axel. He will give me nothing. I must buy it from him.

Father. Really!--How?

Axel. With my work and my--. Oh well, I suppose you would lend me a
little capital?

Father. Not a penny.

Axel. But why?

Father. I will tell you why. Because my son in law must be my
son-in-law, and not a speculating lawyer who sits with his door open and
a sign hung out to beg for custom.

Axel. Is a lawyer's profession a dishonourable one, then?

Father. No, it is not. But you have been received into one of the oldest
and richest families in the country, and you owe some respect to its
traditions. Generation after generation, from time immemorial, the
heads of our family have been lords of the manor--not office seekers
or fortune hunters. The honourable offices I have held have all been
offered to me and not sought by me; and I am not going to have you
chattering about your university degree or your talents. You shall stay
quietly here, and you will be offered more than you want.

Mother. Come, come, my dear, don't get heated over it; that always makes
you so unwell. Let us arrive at some arrangement without wrangling.
Axel, you must be reasonable; you know he cannot stand any
over-exertion. Laura, get your father a glass of water. Come, my dear,
let us go back to the dining-room.

Father. Thanks, I have no appetite left now.

Mother. There, you see!--Axel, Axel!

Laura. For shame, Axel!

Mother. Sit down, dear, sit down! My goodness, how hot you are!

Father. It is so warm in here.

Mother. That is the stove. Shut it down, Mathilde!

Laura (to AXEL). You are a nice one, I must say!

Father. The chairs--put them straight! (They do so.) And the table!
(They do so.) That is better.

Mother. That is the worst of a stranger in the house--something of this
sort may so easily happen.

Father. But a thing like this!--I have never in my life been
contradicted before.

Mother. It is for the first and last time! He will soon learn who you
are and what is due to you.

Father. And to think that, the first time, it should be my son-in-law
that--

Mother. He will regret it for the rest of your life, you may be sure,
and when you are gone he will have no peace of mind. We can only hope
that the atmosphere of affection in this house will improve him. Really,
lately, Axel has behaved as if he were bewitched.

Laura. Yes, hasn't he?

Mother. Good gracious, Laura, do you mean that you--

Laura. No, I didn't mean anything.

Mother. Laura, are you trying to conceal something?

Father. And from us? (Gets up.) Are things as bad as that?

Laura. I assure you, dear people, it is nothing; it is only--

Father and Mother (together). Only--?

Laura. No, no, it is nothing--only you frighten me so.

Father and Mother (together). She is crying!

Mathilde. She is crying!

Father. Now, sir--why is she crying?

Laura. But, father, father--look, I am not crying the least bit.

Mother and Mathilde. Yes, she is crying!

Axel. Yes--and will cry every day until we make a change here! (A pause,
while they all look at him.) Well, as so much has been said, it may as
well all come out. Our marriage is not a happy one, because it lacks the
most essential thing of all.

Mother. Merciful heavens, what are you saying!

Father. Compose yourself; let me talk to him. What do you mean, sir?

Axel. Laura does not love me--

Laura. Yes, that is what he says!

Axel. She hasn't the least idea what love means, and will never learn as
long as she is in her father's house.

Mother and Father. Why?

Axel. Because she lives only for her parents; me, she looks upon merely
as an elder brother who is to assist her in loving them.

Mother. Is that so distasteful to you, then?

Axel. No, no. I am devoted to you and grateful to you, and I am proud of
being your son; but it is only through her that I am that--and she has
never yet really taken me to her heart. I am quite at liberty to go away
or to stay, as I please; _she_ is a fixture here. There is never one
of her requests to me, scarcely a single wish she expresses--indeed,
scarcely a sign of endearment she shows me, that she has not first of
all divided up into three portions; and I get my one-third of it, and
get it last or not at all.

Mother. He is jealous--and of us!

Father. Jealous of us!

Laura. Yes, indeed he is, mother.

Father. This is mere fancy, Axel--a ridiculous idea. Do not let any one
else hear you saying that.

Axel. No, it is neither mere fancy nor is it ridiculous. It colours the
whole of our relations to one another; it gnaws at my feelings, and then
I torment her, make you angry, and lead an idle, empty, ill-tempered
existence--

Father. You are ill, there is no doubt about it.

Axel. I am, and you have made me ill.

Father and Mother (together). We have?

Father. Please be a little--

Axel. You allow her to treat me simply as the largest sized of all the
dolls you have given her to play with. You cannot bear to see her give
away any more of her affection than she might give to one of her dolls.

Father. Please talk in a more seemly manner! Please show us a proper
respect--

Axel. Forgive me, my dear parents, if I don't. What I mean is that a
child cannot be a wife, and as long as she remains with you she will
always be a child.

Mother. But, Axel, did we not tell you she was only a child--

Father. We warned you, we asked you to wait a year or two--

Mother. Because we could not see that she loved you sufficiently.

Father. But your answer was that it was just the child in her that you
loved.

Mother. Just the child's innocence and simplicity. You said you felt
purer in her presence; indeed, that she sometimes made you feel as if
you were in church. And we, her father and mother, understood that, for
we had felt it ourselves.

Father. We felt that just as much as you, my son.

Mother. Do you remember one morning, when she was asleep, that you said
her life was a dream which it would be a sin to disturb?

Father. And said that the mere thought of her made you tread more softly
for fear of waking her.

Axel. That is quite true. Her childlike nature shed happiness upon
me, her gentle innocence stilled me. It is quite true that I felt her
influence upon my senses like that of a beautiful morning.

Father. And now you are impatient with her for being a child!

Axel. Exactly! At the time when I was longing to lead her to the altar,
I daresay I only thought of her as an inspiration to my better self and
my best impulses. She was to me what the Madonna is to a good Catholic;
but now she has become something more than that. The distance between
us no longer exists; I cannot be satisfied with mere adoration, I must
love; I cannot be satisfied with kneeling to her, I need my arms around
her. Her glance has the same delicacy it always had, the same innocence;
but I can no longer sit and gaze at her by the hour. Her glance must
lose itself in mine in complete surrender. Her hand, her arm, her mouth
are the same as they were; but I need to feel her hand stroking my hair,
her arm round my neck, her mouth on mine; her thoughts must embrace mine
and be like sunshine in my heart. She was a symbol to me, but the symbol
has become flesh and blood. When first she came into my thoughts it was
as a child; but I have watched her day by day grow into a woman, whose
shyness and ignorance make her turn away from me, but whom I must
possess. (LAURA moves quickly towards him.)

Mother. He loves our child!

Father. He loves her! (Embraces his wife.) What more is there to say,
then? Everything is as it should be. Come along and have a glass of
sherry!

Axel. No, everything is not as it should be. I can get her gratitude
sometimes in a lucky moment, but not her heart. If I am fond of
a certain thing, she is not. If I wish a thing, she wishes the
opposite--for instance, if it's only a question of going to a ball, she
won't take any pleasure in it unless her mother can go too.

Mother. Good heavens, is it nothing but that!

Laura. No, mother, it is nothing else; it is this ball.

Father. Then for any sake go to the ball! You are a couple of noodles.
Come along, now.

Axel. The ball? It is not the ball. I don't care a bit about the ball.

Laura. No, that is just it, mother. When he gets what he wants, it turns
out that it wasn't what he wanted at all, but something quite different.
I don't understand what it is.

Axel. No, because it is not a question of any one thing, but of our
whole relations to one another. Love is what I miss; she does not know
what it means, and never will know--as long as she remains at home here.
(A pause.)

Mother (slowly). As long as she remains at home?

Father (coming nearer to him, and trembling slightly). What do you mean
by that?

Axel. It will be only when Laura finds she can no longer lean upon her
parents, that she may possibly come to lean upon me.

Mother. What does he mean?

Father. I don't understand--

Axel. If she is to be something more than a good daughter--if she is to
be a good wife--Laura must go away from here.

Mother. Laura go away?

Father. Our child?

Laura (to her MOTHER). Mother!

Axel. It would be wronging her whom I love so deeply, it would be
wronging myself, and wronging you who mean so well, if now, when the
power is in my hands, I had not the spirit to make use of it. Here,
Laura lives only for you; when you die, life will be over for her. But
that is not what marriage means, that is not what she promised at the
altar, and that is what I cannot submit to. To go on like this will only
make us all unhappy; and that is why Laura must go with me! (The MOTHER
starts forward; LAURA goes to MATHILDE.)

Father. You cannot mean what you say.

Axel. I am in deadly earnest, and no one can shake my resolution.

Mother. Then Heaven have mercy on us! (A pause.)

Father. You know, Axel, that God gave us five children; and you know,
too, that He took four away from us again. Laura is now our only child,
our only joy.

Mother. We can't bear to lose her, Axel! She has never been away from us
a single day since she was born. She is the spoilt child of our sorrow;
if death itself claimed her, we should have to hold fast on to her.

Father. Axel, you are not a wicked man; you have not come amongst us to
make us all unhappy?

Axel. If I were to give in now, this state of things would occur again
every week or so, and none of us could stand that. For that reason, my
dear parents, prove yourselves capable of a sacrifice. Let us put an end
to it once for all--and let Laura move into town with me next week.

Father. Good heavens--it is impossible!

Mother. You won't have the heart to do that. Look at her, and then
say that again! (AXEL turns away.) No, I knew you could not. (To the
FATHER.) You talk to him! Tell him the truth, set him right, since he
has broken in upon a good and loving family only to bring misfortune to
it.

Father. In this house, as far back as I can remember, no hard words
have ever been used. It seems to me like some evil dream, that I am
struggling to wake out of and cannot! (A pause.) Mr. Hargaut, when we
gave our daughter to you, we made no conditions. We admitted you into
a happy family, to a position of wealth, to a promising future; and we
expected, in return, some little affection, some little appreciation--at
least some little respect. But you behave like--like a stranger, who is
admitted to one's intimacy and good offices, and then one morning goes
off with the most valuable possessions in the house--like an ungrateful,
cruel--! We have confided our child, the dearest, sweetest child, our
only child, to--a man without a heart! We were two happy parents, rich
in her love--parents whom every one envied and we now are two poor
bereaved wretches, who must creep away together into a corner in their
unhappy disillusionment. (Sits down.)

Mother. And this is the way you can treat the man who has given you
everything! What answer have you to give him?

Axel. It makes my heart bleed. If I had thought it would be as hard as
this, indeed I would never have begun it; but if we leave the matter
unsettled, now that it has been broached, we shall never be on proper
terms with one another again. Of that I am certain. If it is a matter
that pains us all, for that very reason let us go through with it and
get it settled.

Father. Poor confiding fools that we have been!

Mother. Can't you give us some respite, so that we may think things over
quietly? This is simply tearing us apart.

Axel. It would only prolong your pain, and it would end in your hating
me. No, it must be done now--at once; otherwise it will never be done.

Mother. Oh dear, oh dear! (Sits down.)

Father. Axel! Listen to us for a moment! It is quite possible you may be
in the right; but for that very reason I beg you--I, who have never yet
begged anything of any one--I beg you, be merciful! I am an old man, and
cannot stand it--and she (looking at his wife) still less.

Axel. Ah, I am not hard-hearted--but I must try to be resolute. If I
lose now, I shall be losing her for life, I know. Therefore she _shall_
go with me!

Mother (springing up). No, she shall not! If you loved her, as you say
you do, you hypocrite, you would remain where she is--and here she shall
stay!

Laura (who has been standing beside MATHILDE, goes to her MOTHER). Yes,
to my dying day.

Father (getting up). No! We must not alter God's law. It is written: "A
man shall forsake his father and his mother, and cleave only unto his
wife"--and in the same way she must cleave only to him. Laura shall go
when he wishes.

Laura. Father, can you--have you the heart to--?

Father. No, I haven't the heart to, my child. But I shall do it
nevertheless, because it is right. Oh, Laura!--(Embraces her. The MOTHER
joins her embrace to his.)

Mathilde (to AXEL). You Jesuit!--You have no consideration, no mercy;
you trample upon hearts as you would upon the grass that grows in your
path. But you shall not find this so easy as you think. It is true she
is a child--but I shall go with her! I don't know you, and I don't trust
you. (Clenches her fist.) But I shall watch over her!

[Curtain.]




ACT II

(SCENE.--AXEL's house, a year later. The room is arranged almost
identically like that in the first act. Two large portraits of LAURA'S
parents, very well executed, hang in full view. LAURA is sitting at the
table, MATHILDE on the couch on the right.)

Mathilde (reading aloud from a book). "'No,' was the decided answer.
Originally it was he that was to blame, but now it is she. He tore her
from her parents, her home and her familiar surroundings; but since then
he has sought her forgiveness so perseveringly, and her love so humbly,
that it would take all the obstinacy of a spoilt child to withstand him.
Just as formerly he could think of nothing but his love, so now she will
consider nothing except her self-love; but she is so much the more to
blame than he, as her motives are less good than his. She is like a
child that has woke up too early in the morning; it strikes and kicks at
any one that comes to pet it."

Laura. Mathilde--does it really say that?

Mathilde. Indeed it does.

Laura. Just as you read it?

Mathilde. Look for yourself.

Laura (takes the book and looks at it, then lays it down). It is almost
our own story, word for word. I would give anything to know who has
written it.

Mathilde. It is a mere coincidence--

Laura. No, some wicked wretch has seen something like this--some
creature that is heartless enough to be able to mock at a parent's love;
it must be some one who either is worthless himself or has had worthless
parents!

Mathilde. Why, Laura, how seriously you take it!

Laura. Yes, it irritates me, this libelling of all fidelity. What
is fidelity, if it does not mean that a child should be true to its
parents?

Mathilde. But I was just reading to you about that. (Reads.) "The object
of fidelity changes, as we ourselves change. The child's duty is to be
true to its parents; the married, to one another; the aged, to their
children--"

Laura. Don't read any more! I won't hear any more! Its whole train
of thought offends me. (After a pause.) What a horrid book!
(Indifferently.) What happens to them in the end?

Mathilde (in the same tone). To whom?

Laura. That couple--in the book.

Mathilde (still in an indifferent tone). It doesn't end happily. (A
pause.)

Laura (looking up). Which of them suffers?

Mathilde. Which do you think?

Laura (beginning to sew again). She, I should think--because she is
unhappy already.

Mathilde. You have guessed right. She falls in love.

Laura (astonished). Falls in love?

Mathilde. Yes. Sometime or other, love is awakened in the heart of every
woman; and then, if she cannot love her husband, in the course of time
she will love some one else.

Laura (dismayed). Some one else!

Mathilde. Yes. (A pause.)

Laura. That is horrible! (Begins to sew, then lays her hand down on the
table, then begins to sew again.) And what happens to him?

Mathilde. He falls ill, very ill. And then some one finds him out and
comforts him--a woman.

Laura (looking up). How does that happen?

Mathilde. His heart is like an empty house, in an atmosphere of sadness
and longing. Little by little she--the woman who comforts him--creeps
into it; and so in time there comes the day when he can say he is happy.
(A pause.)

Laura (quietly). Who is she?

Mathilde. One of those poor-spirited creatures that can be content with
the aftermath of love.

Laura (after a pause, during which she has been looking fixedly at
MATHILDE). Could you be that?

Mathilde. No!--I must be first or nothing!

Laura. But about her?

Mathilde. The wife?

Laura. Yes. What happens to her?

Mathilde. Directly she realises that love for another has taken
possession of her husband, she turns towards him with all her heart; but
it is too late then. (LAURA sits absorbed for a few moments; then gets
up hurriedly and goes to a little work-table that is standing at the end
of the couch on the left, opens it, looks for something in it, stops to
think, then looks in it again.) What are you looking for?

Laura. A photograph.

Mathilde. Axel's?

Laura. No--but what has become of it?

Mathilde. Don't you remember that one day you took it up and said you
would not have it? So I hid it.

Laura. You?

Mathilde. Yes--till you should ask about it. (Gets up, opens her
work-table that stands by the right-hand couch.) Here it is. (Gives it
to her.)

Laura. So you have got it! (Lays it in her table drawer without looking
at it, shuts the drawer, goes a few paces away, then comes back, turns
the key in the drawer and takes it out.) Has Axel read the new book?

Mathilde. I don't know. Shall I give it to him?

Laura. Just as you like. Perhaps you would like to read it aloud to him.
(A Maid comes in with a letter; LAURA takes it, and the Maid goes out
again.) From my parents! (Kisses the letter with emotion.) The only ones
who love me! (Goes out hurriedly. At the same moment AXEL comes in from
the outer door.)

Axel. She always goes when I come in!

Mathilde (getting up). This time it was an accident, though. (Looks at
him.) How pale you are!

Axel (seriously). I am rather worried.--Have you read the new novel?

Mathilde (putting the book in her pocket). What novel?

Axel. "The Newly-Married Couple"--quite a small book.

Mathilde. Oh, that one--I have just been reading it.

Axel (eagerly). And Laura too? Has Laura read it?

Mathilde. She thinks it is a poor story.

Axel. It isn't that, but it is an extraordinary one. It quite startles
me--it is like coming into one's own room and seeing one's self sitting
there. It has caught hold of unformed thoughts that lie hidden deep in
my soul.

Mathilde. Every good book does that.

Axel. Everything will happen to me just as it does in that book; the
premises are all here, only I had not recognised them.

Mathilde. I have heard of very young doctors feeling the symptoms of all
the diseases they read about.

Axel. Oh, but this is more than mere imagination. My temptations come
bodily before me. My thoughts are the result of what happens, just as
naturally as smoke is the result of fire--and these thoughts (lancing at
MATHILDE) lead me far.

Mathilde. As far as I can see, the book only teaches consideration for a
woman, especially if she is young.

Axel. That is true. But, look here--a young man, brought up among
students, cannot possibly possess, ready-made, all this consideration
that a woman's nature requires. He doesn't become a married man in one
day, but by degrees. He cannot make a clean sweep of his habits and take
up the silken bonds of duty, all in a moment. The inspiration of a first
love gives him the capacity, but he has to learn how to use it. I never
saw what I had neglected till I had frightened her away from me. But
what is there that I have not done, since then, to win her? I have gone
very gently to work and tried from every side to get at her--I have
tempted her with gifts and with penitence--but you can see for yourself
she shrinks from me more and more. My thoughts, wearied with longings
and with the strain of inventing new devices, follow her, and my love
for her only grows--but there are times when such thoughts are succeeded
by a void so great that my whole life seems slipping away into it. It
is then I need some one to cling to--. Oh, Mathilde, you have meant very
much to me at times like that. (Goes up to her.)

Mathilde (getting up). Yes, all sorts of things happen in a year that
one never thought of at the beginning of it.

Axel (sitting down). Good God, what a year! I haven't the courage to
face another like it. This book has frightened me.

Mathilde (aside). That's a good thing, anyway.

Axel (getting up). Besides--the amount of work I have to do, to keep up
everything here just as she was accustomed to have it, is getting to be
too much for me, Mathilde. It won't answer in the long run. If only I
had the reward of thanks that the humblest working-man gets-if it were
only a smile; but when I have been travelling about for a week at a
time, exposed to all sorts of weather in these open boats in winter,
do I get any welcome on my home-coming? When I sit up late, night after
night, does she ever realise whom I am doing it for? Has she as much as
noticed that I have done so--or that I have, at great expense, furnished
this house like her parents'? No, she takes everything as a matter of
course; and if any one were to say to her, "He has done all this for
your sake," she would merely answer, "He need not have done so, I had it
all in my own home."

Mathilde. Yes, you have come to a turning-point now.

Axel. What do you mean?

Mathilde. Nothing particular--here she comes!

Axel. Has anything happened? She is in such a hurry!

[LAURA comes in with an open letter in her hand.]

Laura (in a low voice, to MATHILDE). Mother and father are so lonely
at home that they are going abroad, to Italy; but they are coming here,
Mathilde, before they leave the country.

Mathilde. Coming here? When?

Laura. Directly. I hadn't noticed--the letter is written from the
nearest posting station; they want to take us by surprise--they will be
here in a few minutes. Good heavens, what are we to do?

Mathilde (quickly). Tell Axel that!

Laura. I tell him?

Mathilde. Yes, you must.

Laura (in a frightened voice). I?

Mathilde (to AXEL). Laura has something she wants to tell you.

Laura. Mathilde!

Axel. This is something new.

Laura. Oh, do tell him, Mathilde. (MATHILDE says nothing, but goes to
the back of the room.)

Axel (coming up to her). What is it?

Laura (timidly). My parents are coming.

Axel. Here?

Laura. Yes.

Axel. When? To-day?

Laura. Yes. Almost directly.

Axel. And no one has told me! (Takes up his hat to go.)

Laura (frightened). Axel!

Axel. It is certainly not for the pleasure of finding me here that they
are coming.

Laura. But you mustn't go!

Mathilde. No, you mustn't do that.

Axel. Are they not going to put up here?

Laura. Yes, I thought--if you are willing--in your room.

Axel. So that is what it is to be--I am to go away and they are to take
my place.

Mathilde. Take my room, and I will move into Laura's. I will easily
arrange that. (Goes out.)

Axel. Why all this beating about the bush? It is quite natural that you
should want to see them, and equally natural that I should remove myself
when they come; only you should have broken it to me--a little more
considerately. Because I suppose they are coming now to take you with
them--and, even if it means nothing to you to put an end to everything
like this, at all events you ought to know what it means to me!

Laura. I did not know till this moment that they were coming.

Axel. But it must be your letters that have brought them here--your
complaints--

Laura. I have made no complaints.

Axel. You have only told them how matters stand here.

Laura. Never. (A pause.)

Axel (in astonishment). What have you been writing to them all this
year, then--a letter every day?

Laura. I have told them everything was going well here.

Axel. Is it possible? All this time? Laura! Dare I believe it? Such
consideration--(Comes nearer to her.) Ah, at last, then--?

Laura (frightened). I did it out of consideration for them.

Axel (coldly). For them? Well, I am sorry for them, then. They will soon
see how things stand between us.

Laura. They are only to be here a day or two. Then they go abroad.

Axel. Abroad? But I suppose some one is going with them?--you, perhaps?

Laura. You can't, can you?

Axel. No.--So you are going away from me, Laura!--I am to remain here
with Mathilde--it is just like that book.

Laura. With Mathilde? Well--perhaps Mathilde could go with them?

Axel. You know we can't do without her here--as things are at present.

Laura. Perhaps you would rather I--?

Axel. There is no need for you to ask my leave. You go if you wish.

Laura. Yes, you can do without _me_.--All the same, I think I shall
stay!

Axel. You will stay--with me?

Laura. Yes.

Axel (in a happier voice, coming up to her). _That_ is not out of
consideration for your parents?

Laura. No, that it isn't! (He draws back in astonishment. MATHILDE comes
in.)

Mathilde. It is all arranged. (To AXEL.) You will stay, then?

Axel (looking at LAURA). I don't know.--If I go away for these few days,
perhaps it will be better.

Mathilde (coming forward). Very well, then I shall go away too!

Laura. You?

Axel. You?

Mathilde. Yes, I don't want to have anything to do with what happens. (A
pause.)

Axel. What do you think will happen?

Mathilde. That is best left unsaid--till anything does happen. (A
pause.)

Axel. You are thinking too hardly of your friend now.

Laura (quietly). Mathilde is not my friend.

Axel. Mathilde not your--

Laura (as before). A person who is always deceiving one is no friend.

Axel. Has Mathilde deceived anybody? You are unjust.

Laura (as before). Am I? It is Mathilde's fault that I am unhappy now.

Axel. Laura!

Laura. My dear, you may defend her, if you choose; but you must allow me
to tell you plainly that it is Mathilde's advice that has guided me from
the days of my innocent childhood, and has led me into all the misery I
am suffering now! If it were not for her I should not be married to-day
and separated from my parents. She came here with me--not to help me, as
she pretended--but to be able still to spy on me, quietly and secretly,
in her usual way, and afterwards to make use of what she had discovered.
But she devotes herself to you; because she--no, I won't say it! (With
growing vehemence.) Well, just you conspire against me, you two--and see
whether I am a child any longer! The tree that you have torn up by
the roots and transplanted will yield you no fruit for the first year,
however much you shake its branches! I don't care if things do happen as
they do in that story she has taken such pleasure in reading to me; but
I shall never live to see the day when I shall beg for any one's love!
And now my parents are coming to see everything, everything--and that is
just what I want them to do! Because I won't be led like a child, and
I won't be deceived! I won't! (Stands quite still for a moment, then
bursts into a violent fit of crying and runs out.)

Axel (after a pause). What is the meaning of that?

Mathilde. She hates me.

Axel (astonished). When did it come to that?

Mathilde. Little by little. Is it the first time you have noticed it?

Axel (still more astonished). Have you no longer her confidence, then?

Mathilde. No more than you.

Axel. She, who once believed every one--!

Mathilde. Now she believes no one. (A pause.)

Axel. And what is still more amazing--only there is no mistaking it--is
that she is jealous!

Mathilde. Yes.

Axel. And of you?--When there is not the slightest foundation--. (Stops
involuntarily and looks at her; she crosses the room.)

Mathilde. You should only be glad that this has happened.

Axel. That she is jealous?--or what do you mean?

Mathilde. It has helped her. She is on the high road to loving you now.

Axel. Now?

Mathilde. Love often comes in that way--especially to the one who has
been made uneasy.

Axel. And you are to be the scapegoat?

Mathilde. I am accustomed to that.

Axel (quickly, as he comes nearer to her). You must have known love
yourself, Mathilde?

Mathilde (starts, then says). Yes, I have loved too.

Axel. Unhappily?

Mathilde. Not happily. But why do you ask?

Axel. Those who have been through such an experience are less selfish
than the rest of us and are capable of more.

Mathilde. Yes. Love is always a consecration, but not always for the
same kind of service.

Axel. Sometimes it only brings unhappiness.

Mathilde. Yes, when people have nothing in them, and no pride.

Axel. The more I get to know of you, the less I seem really to know
you. What sort of a man can this fellow be, that you have loved without
return?

Mathilde (in a subdued voice). A man to whom I am now very grateful;
because marriage is not my vocation.

Axel. What is your vocation, then?

Mathilde. One that one is unwilling to speak about, until one knows that
it has been successful.--And I don't believe I should have discovered
it, but for him.

Axel. And is your mind quite at peace now? Have you no longings?

Mathilde (speaking here, and in what follows, with some vehemence). Yes,
a longing to travel--a long, long way! To fill my soul with splendid
pictures!--Oh, if you have any regard for me--

Axel. I have more than that, Mathilde--the warmest gratitude--and more
than that, I--

Mathilde (interrupting him). Well, then, make it up with Laura! Then
I shall be able to go abroad with her parents. Oh, if I don't get
away--far away--there is something within me that will die!

Axel. Go away then, Mathilde--you say so, and therefore I believe you.

Mathilde. But I am not going till you two are reconciled! I don't want
all three of us to be unhappy. No, I am not unhappy; but I shall be if
you are--and if I don't get abroad now!

Axel. What can I do in the matter?

Mathilde (quickly). Stay here and give the old folk a welcome! Behave to
Laura as if there were nothing the matter, and she will say nothing!

Axel. Why do you think she will say nothing?

Mathilde. Because of all I have done to make that likely!

Axel. You?

Mathilde. Yes--no--yes; at least, not as you wanted me to, but
indirectly--

Axel. Even at the beginning of all this?

Mathilde. No, not then, it is true. But forget that, because now I have
made it good! I did not know you then--and there were reasons--

Axel (going nearer to her). Mathilde, you have filled me with an
extraordinary regard for you--as if everything that I have been denied
in another quarter was to be found in you, and as if now for the first
time I--

Mathilde. There is the carriage!

Axel. What shall I do?

Mathilde. Go down and welcome the old folk! Be quick! Look, Laura is
down there already--oh, don't let her miss you just at this moment!
There, that is right. (He goes.) Yes, that was right; this is my first
real victory! (Goes out. Voices are heard without, and soon afterwards
the MOTHER comes in with LAURA, and after her the FATHER with AXEL and
MATHILDE.)

Mother. So here I am in your home, my darling child! (Kisses her.) It is
really worth being separated, for the pleasure of meeting again! (Kisses
her.) And such nice letters from you, every single day--thank you,
darling! (Kisses her again.) And you look just the same--just the same!
Perhaps a trifle paler, but that is natural. (Kisses her.)

Axel (to the FATHER, who is taking off a coat and several comforters).
May I?

Father (bowing). Thank you, I can manage quite well myself.

Axel. But let me hang them up for you?

Father. Much obliged--I will do it myself! (Takes them out into the
hall.)

Mother (to LAURA, in a low voice). It was hard work to get your father
to come, I can tell you. He still cannot forget--. But we had to see
our little girl before we set off on our travels; and we had to travel,
because it was getting so lonely at home.

Laura. Dear mother! (She and MATHILDE help her to take her things off.)

Axel (to the FATHER, who has come in again). I hope you had a pleasant
journey, sir?

Father. Remarkably pleasant.

Axel. Caught no cold, I hope?

Father. Nothing to speak of--just a trifle--a slightly relaxed throat;
out late--and heavy dews. You are well?

Axel. Very well, thank you.

Father. I am extremely pleased to hear it.

Mother (to the FATHER). But, do you see--?

Father. What, my love?

Mother. Do you mean to say you don't see?

Father. No, what is it?

Mother. We are at home again! This is our own room over again!

Father (in astonishment). Upon my word--!

Mother. The carpet, the curtains, the furniture, everything--even down
to their arrangement in the room! (Goes across to AXEL and takes his
hand.) A more touching proof of your love for her we could never have
had! (To the FATHER.) Isn't that so?

Father (struggling with his astonishment). Yes, I must say--

Mother. And you never wrote us a single word about this, Laura?

Mathilde. It is not only this room, but the whole house is arranged like
yours as far as possible.

Mother. The whole house! Is it possible!

Father. It is the most charming way of giving pleasure to a young wife
that I ever heard of!

Mother. I am so astonished, Laura, at your never having mentioned a word
of all this in your letters.

Father. Never a word of it!

Mother. Hadn't you noticed it?

Father. Ah, well--what one sees every day, one is apt to think every one
knows all about--isn't that it, little girl? That is the explanation,
isn't it?

Mother. And Axel has given you all this by his own exertions! Aren't you
proud of that?

Father (clapping her on the back). Of course she is, but it was never
Laura's way to say much about her feelings; although this is really
something so--

Mother (laughing). Her letters lately have been nothing but
dissertations upon love.

Laura. Mother--!

Mother. Oh, I am going to tell! But you have a good husband, Laura.

Laura. Mother--!

Mother (in a lower voice). You have paid him some little attentions in
return, of course?--given him something, or--

Father (pushing in between them). Worked something for him, eh?

(MATHILDE, in the meantime, has brought in wine and filled some
glasses.)

Axel. Now, a glass of wine to welcome you--sherry, your favourite wine,
sir.

Mother. He remembers that! (They each take a glass in their hands.)

Axel. Laura and I bid you heartily welcome here in our house! And we
hope you will find everything here--(with emotion) just as you would
wish it. I will do my best that you shall, and I am sure Laura will too.

Mother. Of course she will!--Drink his health! (AXEL touches her glass
with his; her hand trembles, and she spills come wine.) You have filled
the glasses too full, my dear! (They all clink glasses and drink.)

Father (when the glasses have been filled again). My wife and I--thank
you very much for your welcome. We could not set out on our journey
without first seeing our child--our two children. A good friend of ours
(looking at MATHILDE) advised us to come unexpectedly. At first we
did not want to but now we are glad we did; because now we can see for
ourselves that Laura told the truth in her letters. You are happy--and
therefore we old folk must be happy too, and bury all recollection of
what--what evidently happened for the best. Hm, hm!--At one time we
could not think it was so--and that was why we did not wish to be
parted from our child; but now we can make our minds quite easy about
it--because now we can trust you. I have complete trust in you, Axel,
my dear son--God bless you! (They grasp hands, and drink to each other
again.)

Mother. Do you know what I should like?

All. No!

Mother. I should like Axel to tell us how your reconciliation came
about.

Laura. Mother!

Mother. Why should you be shy about it? Why have you never told us about
it? Good gracious, didn't you think your parents would be only too glad
to hear how lucky their little girl was?

Father. I think it is a very good idea of your mother's. Now let us sit
down and hear all about it. (They sit down; LAURA turns away.) No, come
and sit down beside your mother, Laura! We are going to have a good look
at you while he tells us about it. (Pulls her to him.)

Mother. And don't forget anything, Axel! Tell us of the very first sign
of love, the first little kindness, Laura showed you.

Axel. Yes, I will tell you how it came about.

Laura (getting up). But, Axel--!

Axel. I shall only be supplementing what you told in your letters,
Laura.

Mother. It is all to your credit, my child! Now be quiet and listen to
him, and correct him if he forgets anything. (Pulls her down to her seat
again.)

Axel. Yes, my dear parents. You know, of course, that we did not begin
very well--

Father. Quite so--but you can pass over that.

Axel. As soon as she was left to depend on herself alone, I realised the
great wrong I had done to Laura. She used to tremble when I came near
her, and before long she used to tremble just as much before any one. At
first I felt the humility of a strong man who has triumphed; but after a
time I became anxious, for I had acted too strongly. Then I dedicated my
love to the task of winning back, in a Jacob's seven years of service,
what I had lost in one moment. You see this house--I made everything
smooth in it for her feet. You see what we have round us--I set that
before her eyes. By means of nights of work, by exerting myself to the
uttermost, I got it all together, bit by bit--in order that she should
never feel anything strange or inhospitable in her home, but only what
she was accustomed to and fond of. She understood; and soon the birds of
spring began to flutter about our home. And, though she always ran away
when I came, I was conscious of her presence in a hundred little loving
touches in my room--at my desk--

Laura (ashamed). Oh, it isn't true!

Axel. Don't believe her! Laura is so kind-hearted--her fear of me made
her shy, but she could not withstand her own kind impulses and my humble
faithfulness. When I was sitting late in my room, working for her,
she was sitting up in hers--at any rate I often thought I heard her
footstep; and when I came home late after a wearisome journey, if she
did not run to welcome me, it was not because she was wanting in wifely
gratitude--Laura has no lack of that--but because she did not wish to
betray her happiness till the great day of our reconciliation should
come. (LAURA gets up.)

Father. Then you were not reconciled immediately?

Axel. Not immediately.

Mother (anxiously, in a subdued voice). My goodness, Laura did not say a
word about that!

Axel. Because she loved you, and did not want to distress you
unnecessarily. But does not her very silence about it show that she was
waiting for me? That was her love's first gift to me. (LAURA sits down
again.) After a while she gave me others. She saw that I was not angry;
on the contrary, she saw that where I had erred, I had erred through my
love for her; and she is so loving herself, that little by little she
schooled herself to meet me in gentle silence--she longed to be a good
wife. And then, one lovely morning--just like to-day--we both had
been reading a book which was like a voice from afar, threatening our
happiness, and we were driven together by fear. Then, all at once,
all the doors and windows flew wide open! It was your letter! The room
seemed to glow with warmth--just as it does now with you sitting there;
summer went singing through the house--and then I saw in her eyes that
all the blossoms were going to unfold their petals! Then I knelt down
before her, as I do now, and said: For your parents' sake, that they
may be happy about us--for my sake, that I may not be punished any
longer--for your own sake, that you may be able again to live as the
fulness of your kind heart prompts--let us find one another now! And
then Laura answered--(LAURA throws herself into his arms, in a burst of
tears. All get up.)

Mother. That was beautiful, children!

Father. As beautiful as if we were young again ourselves, and had found
one another!--How well he told it, too!

Mother. Yes, it was just as if it was all happening before our eyes!

Father. Wasn't it?--He's a very gifted man.

Mother (in a low voice). He will do something big!

Father (in the same tones). Ay, a big man--and one of our family!

Axel (who has advanced towards the foreground with LAURA). So that was
your answer, Laura?

Laura. You haven't remembered everything.

Mother. Is there something more? Let us hear some more!

Axel. What did you say, then?

Laura. You know I said that something had held me back a long, long
time! I saw well enough that you were fond of me, but I was afraid it
was only as you would be fond of a child.

Axel. Laura!

Laura. I am not so clever as--as some others, you know; but I am not a
child any longer, because now I love you!

Axel. You are a child, all the same!

Father (to the MOTHER). But what about our arrangements? We were to have
gone on our travels at once.

Axel. No, stay with us a few days now! (LAURA makes a sign to him.) Not?

Laura (softly). I would rather be alone with you, now.

Mother. What are you saying, Laura?

Laura. I?--I was saying that I should like to ask you, if you are going
abroad now, to take Mathilde with you.

Mother. That is very nice of you, Laura, to remember Mathilde. People
generally say that newly-married couples think of no one but themselves.

Father. No, Laura is not like that!

All. No, Laura is not like that!

Laura (gently). Mathilde, forgive me! (They embrace, and LAURA says
softly:) I understand you now for the first time!

Mathilde. Not quite.

Laura. I know that I should never have got Axel, but for you.

Mathilde. That is true.

Laura. Oh, Mathilde, I am so happy now!

Mathilde. And I wish you every happiness.

Axel (taking LAURA'S arm). Now you may go and travel abroad, Mathilde!

Mathilde. Yes!--and my next book shall be a better one.

Axel. Your next--?

[Curtain.]
