HAGOROMO



HAGOROMO, A PLAY IN ONE ACT.


PERSONS OF THE PLAY


THE PRIEST             Hakuryo

A FISHERMAN

A TENNIN

CHORUS



HAGOROMO

The plot of the play 'Hagoromo, the Feather-mantle' is as follows. The
priest finds the Hagoromo, the magical feather-mantle of a Tennin, an
aerial spirit or celestial dancer, hanging upon a bough. She demands
its return. He argues with her, and finally promises to return it, if she
will teach him her dance or part of it. She accepts the offer. The Chorus
explains the dance as symbolical of the daily changes of the moon. The
words about 'three, five and fifteen' refer to the number of nights in
the moon's changes. In the finale, the Tennin is supposed to disappear
like a mountain slowly hidden in mist. The play shows the relation of the
early Noh to the God-dance.


PRIEST

  Windy road of the waves by Miwo,
  Swift with ships, loud over steersmen's voices.
  Hakuryo, taker of fish, head of his house,
  Dwells upon the barren pine-waste of Miwo.

A FISHERMAN
Upon a thousand heights had gathered the inexplicable cloud, swept by the
rain. The moon is just come to light the low house. A clean and pleasant
time surely. There comes the breath-colour of spring; the waves rise in a
line below the early mist; the moon is still delaying above, though we've
no skill to grasp it. Here is a beauty to set the mind above itself.

CHORUS

  I shall not be out of memory
  Of the mountain road by Kiyomi,
  Nor of the parted grass by that bay,
  Nor of the far-seen pine-waste
  Of Miwo of wheat stalks.

Let us go according to custom. Take hands against the wind here, for it
presses the clouds and the sea. Those men who were going to fish are
about to return without launching. Wait a little, is it not spring? will
not the wind be quiet? this wind is only the voice of the lasting
pine-trees, ready for stillness. See how the air is soundless, or would be,
were it not for the waves. There now, the fishermen are putting out with
even the smallest boats.

PRIEST
Now I am come to shore at Miwo-no; I disembark in Subara; I see all that
they speak of on the shore. An empty sky with music, a rain of flowers,
strange fragrance on every side; all these are no common things, nor is
this cloak that hangs upon the pine-tree. As I approach to inhale its
colour I am aware of mystery. Its colour-smell is mysterious. I see that
it is surely no common dress. I will take it now and return and make it a
treasure in my house, to show to the aged.

TENNIN
That cloak belongs to someone on this side. What are you proposing to do
with it?

PRIEST
This? this is a cloak picked up. I am taking it home, I tell you.

TENNIN

  That is a feather-mantle not fit for a mortal to bear,
  Not easily wrested from the sky-traversing spirit,
  Not easily taken or given.
  I ask you to leave it where you found it.

PRIEST
How, is the owner of this cloak a Tennin? so be it. In this downcast age
I should keep it, a rare thing, and make it a treasure in the country, a
thing respected. Then I should not return it.

TENNIN
Pitiful, there is no flying without the cloak of feathers, no return
through the ether. I pray you return me the mantle.

PRIEST
Just from hearing these high words, I, Hakuryo have gathered more and yet
more force. You think, because I was too stupid to recognise it, that I
shall be unable to take and keep hid the feather-robe, that I shall give
it back for merely being told to stand and withdraw?

TENNIN

  A Tennin without her robe,
  A bird without wings,
  How shall she climb the air?

PRIEST
And this world would be a sorry place for her to dwell in?

TENNIN
I am caught, I struggle, how shall I?...

PRIEST
No, Hakuryo is not one to give back the robe.

TENNIN
Power does not attain....

PRIEST
To get back the robe.

CHORUS
Her coronet [1] jewelled as with the dew of tears, even the flowers that
decorated her hair drooping, and fading, the whole chain of weaknesses
[2] of the dying Tennin can be seen actually before the eyes. Sorrow!

[Footnote 1: Vide examples of state head-dress of kingfisher feathers, in
the South Kensington Museum.]

[Footnote 2: The chain of weaknesses, or the five ills, diseases of the
Tennin: namely, the hanakadzusa withers; the Hagoromo is stained; sweat
comes from the body; both eyes wink frequently; she feels very weary of
her palace in heaven.]

TENNIN
I look into the flat of heaven, peering; the cloud-road is all hidden and
uncertain; we are lost in the rising mist; I have lost the knowledge of
the road. Strange, a strange sorrow!

CHORUS
Enviable colour of breath, wonder of clouds that fade along the sky that
was our accustomed dwelling; hearing the sky-bird, accustomed and well
accustomed, hearing the voices grow fewer, the wild geese fewer and fewer
along the highways of air, how deep her longing to return. Plover and
seagull are on the waves in the offing. Do they go, or do they return?
She reaches out for the very blowing of the spring wind against heaven.

PRIEST (to the Tennin)
What do you say? now that I can see you in your sorrow, gracious, of
heaven, I bend and would return you your mantle.

TENNIN
It grows clearer. No, give it this side.

PRIEST
First tell me your nature, who are you, Tennin? give payment with the
dance of the Tennin, and I will return you your mantle.

TENNIN
Readily and gladly, and then I return into heaven. You shall have what
pleasure you will, and I will leave a dance here, a joy to be new among
men and to be memorial dancing. Learn then this dance that can turn the
palace of the moon. No, come here to learn it. For the sorrows of the
world I will leave this new dancing with you for sorrowful people. But
give me my mantle, I cannot do the dance rightly without it.

PRIEST
Not yet, for if you should get it, how do I know you'll not be off to
your palace without even beginning your dance, not even a measure?

TENNIN
Doubt is fitting for mortals; with us there is no deceit.

PRIEST
I am again ashamed. I give you your mantle.

CHORUS
The young maid now is arrayed; she assumes the curious mantle; watch how
she moves in the dance of the rainbow-feathered garment.

PRIEST
The heavenly feather-robe moves in accord with the wind.

TENNIN
The sleeves of flowers are being wet with the rain.

PRIEST
The wind and the sleeve move together.

CHORUS

  It seems that she dances.
  Thus was the dance of pleasure,
  Suruga dancing, brought to the sacred east.
  Thus was it when the lords of the everlasting
  Trod the world,
  They being of old our friends.
  Upon ten sides their sky is without limit,
  They have named it on this account, 'the enduring.'

TENNIN
The jewelled axe takes up the eternal renewing, the palace of the
moon-god is being renewed with the jewelled axe, and this is always
recurring.

CHORUS (commenting on the dance)
  The white kiromo, the black kiromo,
  Three, five into fifteen,
  The figure that the Tennin is dividing.
  There are heavenly nymphs, Amaotome, [3]
  One for each night of the month,
  And each with her deed assigned.

[Footnote 3: Cf. 'Paradiso,' xxiii, 25. 'Quale nei plenilunii sereni
Trivia ride tra le ninfe eterne.']

TENNIN
I also am heaven-born and a maid, Amaotome. Of them there are many. This
is the dividing of my body, that is fruit of the moon's tree, Katsuma.
[4] This is one part of our dance that I leave to you here in your world.

[Footnote 4: A tree something like the laurel.]

CHORUS
The spring mist is widespread abroad; so perhaps the wild olive's flower
will blossom in the infinitely unreachable moon. Her flowery
head-ornament is putting on colour; this truly is sign of the spring. Not
sky is here, but the beauty; and even here comes the heavenly, wonderful
wind. O blow, shut the accustomed path of the clouds. O, you in the form
of a maid, grant us the favour of your delaying. The pine-waste of Miwo
puts on the colour of spring. The bay of Kiyomi lies clear before the
snow upon Fuji. Are not all these presages of the spring? There are but
few ripples beneath the piny wind. It is quiet along the shore. There is
naught but a fence of jewels between the earth and the sky, and the gods
within and without, [5] beyond and beneath the stars, and the moon
unclouded by her lord, and we who are born of the sun. This alone
intervenes, here where the moon is unshadowed, here in Nippon, the sun's
field.

[Footnote 5: 'Within and without,' gei, gu, two parts of the temple]

TENNIN
The plumage of heaven drops neither feather nor flame to its own
diminution.

CHORUS
Nor is this rock of earth over-much worn by the brushing of that
feather-mantle, the feathery skirt of the stars: rarely, how rarely.
There is a magic song from the east, the voices of many and many: and
flute and shae, filling the space beyond the cloud's edge,
seven-stringed; dance filling and filling. The red sun blots on the sky
the line of the colour-drenched mountains. The flowers rain in a gust;
it is no racking storm that comes over this green moor, which is afloat,
as it would seem, in these waves. Wonderful is the sleeve of the white
cloud, whirling such snow here.

TENNIN
Plain of life, field of the sun, true foundation, great power!

CHORUS
Hence and for ever this dancing shall be called, 'a revel in the east.'
Many are the robes thou hast, now of the sky's colour itself, and now a
green garment.

SEMI-CHORUS
And now the robe of mist, presaging spring, a colour-smell as this
wonderful maiden's skirt--left, right, left! The rustling of flowers, the
putting-on of the feathery sleeve; they bend in air with the dancing.

SEMI-CHORUS
Many are the joys in the east. She who is the colour-person of the moon
takes her middle-night in the sky. She marks her three fives with this
dancing, as a shadow of all fulfilments. The circled vows are at full.
Give the seven jewels of rain and all of the treasure, you who go from
us. After a little time, only a little time, can the mantle be upon the
wind that was spread over Matsubara or over Ashilaka the mountain,
though the clouds lie in its heaven like a plain awash with sea. Fuji is
gone; the great peak of Fuji is blotted out little by little. It melts
into the upper mist. In this way she (the Tennin) is lost to sight.




KUMASAKA


A PLAY IN TWO ACTS BY UJINOBU, ADOPTED SON OF MOTOKIJO.


PERSONS OF THE PLAY


A PRIEST

FIRST SHITE, OR HERO    The apparition of Kumasaka in the form of an old
                        priest

SECOND SHITE            The apparition of Kumasaka in his true form.

CHORUS      This chorus sometimes speaks what the chief
characters are thinking, sometimes it describes
or interprets the meaning of their movements.
Plot: the ghost of Kumasaka makes reparation for
his brigandage by protecting the country. He
comes back to praise the bravery of the young man
who killed him in single combat.



KUMASAKA


First Part

PRIEST
Where shall I rest, wandering, weary of the world? I am a city-bred
priest, I have not seen the east counties, and I've a mind to go there.
Crossing the hills, I look on the lake of Omi, on the woods of Awatsu.
Going over the long bridge at Seta, I rested a night at Noje, and another
at Shinohara, and at the dawn I came to the green field, Awono in Miwo. I
now pass Akasaka at sunset.

SHITE (In the form of an old priest)
I could tell that priest a thing or two.

PRIEST
Do you mean me, what is it?

SHITE
A certain man died on this day. I ask you to pray for him.

PRIEST
All right, but for whom shall I pray?

SHITE
I will not tell you his name, but his grave lies in the green field
beyond that tall pine tree. He cannot enter to the gates of Paradise, and
so I ask you to pray.

PRIEST
But I do not think it is proper to pray unless you tell me his name.

SHITE
No, no; you can pray the prayer, Ho kai shijo biodo riaku; that would do.

PRIEST (praying)
Unto all mortals let there be equal grace, to pass from this life of
agony by the gates of death into law, into the peaceful kingdom.

SHITE (saying first a word or two)
If you pray for him,--

CHORUS (continuing the sentence)
If you pray with the prayer of 'Exeat' he will be thankful, and you need
not be aware of his name. They say that prayer can be heard for even the
grass and the plants, for even the sand and the soil here; and they will
surely hear it, if you pray for an unknown man.

SHITE
Will you enter? This is my cottage.

PRIEST
This is your house? Very well, I will hold the service in your house; but
I see no picture of Buddha nor any wooden image in this cottage, nothing
but a long spear on one wall and an iron stick in place of a priest's
wand, and many arrows. What are these for?

SHITE (thinking)
Yes, this priest is still in the first stage of faith. (aloud) As you
see, there are many villages here: Zorii, Awohaka, and Akasaka. But the
tall grass of Awo-no-ga-kara grows round the roads between them, and the
forest is thick at Koyasu and Awohaka, and many robbers come out under
the rains. They attack the baggage on horseback, and take the clothing of
maids and servants who pass here. So I go out with this spear.

PRIEST
That's very fine, isn't it?

CHORUS
You will think it very strange for a priest to do this; but even Buddha
has the sharp sword of Mida, and Aijen Miowo has arrows, and Tamon,
taking his long spear, throws down the evil spirits.

SHITE
The deep love.

CHORUS
--is excellent. Good feeling and keeping order are much more excellent
than the love of Bosatsu. 'I think of these matters and know little of
anything else. It is from my own heart that I am lost, wandering. But if
I begin talking I shall keep on talking until dawn. Go to bed, good
father; I will sleep too.' He seemed to be going to his bedroom, but
suddenly his figure disappeared, and the cottage became a field of grass.
The priest passes the night under the pine trees.

PRIEST
I cannot sleep out the night. Perhaps if I held my service during the
night under this pine tree....

(He begins his service for the dead man.)

       *       *       *       *       *


Second Part

SECOND SHITE
There are winds in the east and south; the clouds are not calm in the
west; and in the north the wind of the dark evening blusters; and under
the shade of the mountain--

CHORUS
There is a rustling of boughs and leaves.

SECOND SHITE
Perhaps there will be moon-shine to-night, but the clouds veil the sky;
the moon will not break up their shadow. 'Have at them!' 'Ho there!'
'Dash in!' That is the way I would shout, calling and ordering my men
before and behind, my bowmen and horsemen. I plundered men of their
treasure, that was my work in the world, and now I must go on; it is
sorry work for a spirit.

PRIEST
Are you Kumasaka Chohan? Tell me the tale of your years.

SECOND SHITE (now known as Kumasaka)
There were great merchants in Sanjo, Yoshitsugu, and Nobutaka; they
collected treasure each year; they sent rich goods up to Oku. It was then
I assailed their trains. Would you know what men were with me?

PRIEST
Tell me the chief men, were they from many a province?

KUMASAKA
There was Kakusho of Kawachi, there were the two brothers Suriharitaro;
they have no rivals in fencing. (omotenchi, face to face attack)

PRIEST
What chiefs came to you from the city?

KUMASAKA
Emoi of Sanjo, Kozari of Mibu.

PRIEST
In the fighting with torches and in mêlée--

KUMASAKA
They had no equals.

PRIEST
In northern Hakoku?

KUMASAKA
Were Aso no Matsuwaka and Mikune no Kure.

PRIEST
In Kaga?

KUMASAKA
No, Chohan was the head there. There were seventy comrades who were very
strong and skilful.

CHORUS
While Yoshitsugu was going along in the fields and on the mountains we
set many spies to take him.

KUMASAKA
Let us say that he is come to the village of Ubasike. This is the best
place to attack him. There are many ways to escape if we are defeated,
and he has invited many guests and has had a great feast at the inn.

PRIEST
When the night was advanced the brothers Yoshitsugu and Nobutaka fell
asleep.

KUMASAKA
But there was a small boy with keen eyes, about sixteen or seventeen
years old, and he was looking through a little hole in the partition,
alert to the slightest noise.

PRIEST
He did not sleep even a wink.

KUMASAKA
We did not know it was Ushiwaka.

PRIEST
It was fate.

KUMASAKA
The hour had come.

PRIEST
Be quick!

KUMASAKA
Have at them!

CHORUS (describing the original combat, now symbolized in the dance)
At this word they rushed in, one after another. They seized the torches;
it seemed as if gods could not face them. Ushiwaka stood unafraid; he
seized a small sword and fought like a lion in earnest, like a tiger
rushing, like a bird swooping. He fought so cleverly that he felled the
thirteen who opposed him; many were wounded besides. They fled without
swords or arrows. Then Kumasaka said, 'Are you the devil? Is it a god who
has struck down these men with such ease? Perhaps you are not a man.
However, dead men take no plunder, and I'd rather leave this truck of
Yoshitsugu's than my corpse.' So he took his long spear and was about to
make off.

KUMASAKA
--But Kumasaka thought--

CHORUS (taking it up)
What can he do, that young chap, if I ply my secret arts freely? Be he
god or devil, I will grasp him and grind him. I will offer his body as
sacrifice to those whom he has slain. So he drew back, and holding
his long spear against his side he hid himself behind the door and stared
at the young lad. Ushiwaka beheld him, and holding his sword at his side
he crouched at a little distance. Kumasaka waited likewise. They both
waited, alertly; then Kumasaka stepped forth swiftly with his left foot,
and struck out with the long spear. It would have run through an iron
wall. Ushiwaka parried it lightly, swept it away, left volted. Kumasaka
followed and again lunged out with the spear, and Ushiwaka parried
the spear-blade quite lightly. Then Kumasaka turned the edge of his
spear-blade towards Ushiwaka and slashed at him, and Ushiwaka leaped to
the right. Kumasaka lifted his spear and the two weapons were twisted
together. Ushiwaka drew back his blade. Kumasaka swung with his spear.
Ushiwaka led up and stepped into shadow.

Kumasaka tried  to find him, and Ushiwaka slit through the back-chink of
his armour; this seemed the end of his course, and he was wroth to be
slain by such a young boy.

KUMASAKA
Slowly the wound--

CHORUS
--seemed to pierce; his heart failed; weakness o'ercame him.

KUMASAKA
At the foot of this pine tree--

CHORUS
He vanished like a dew.

And so saying, he disappeared among the shades of the pine tree at
Akasaka, and night fell.
