THE KING’S THRESHOLD




  TO FRANK FAY

  BECAUSE OF HIS BEAUTIFUL SPEAKING IN
  THE CHARACTER OF SEANCHAN




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


  KING GUAIRE
  SEANCHAN (_pronounced_ SHANAHAN)
  HIS PUPILS
  THE MAYOR OF KINVARA
  TWO CRIPPLES
  BRIAN (_an old servant_)
  THE LORD HIGH CHAMBERLAIN
  A SOLDIER
  A MONK
  COURT LADIES
  TWO PRINCESSES
  FEDELM




THE KING’S THRESHOLD.


    _Steps before the Palace of KING GUAIRE at Gort. A
    table in front of steps at one side, with food on it,
    and a bench by table. SEANCHAN lying on steps. PUPILS
    before steps. KING on the upper step before a curtained
    door._

KING.

  I WELCOME you that have the mastery
  Of the two kinds of Music: the one kind
  Being like a woman, the other like a man.
  Both you that understand stringed instruments,
  And how to mingle words and notes together
  So artfully, that all the Art’s but Speech
  Delighted with its own music; and you that carry
  The long twisted horn, and understand
  The heady notes that, being without words,
  Can hurry beyond Time and Fate and Change.
  For the high angels that drive the horse of Time—
  The golden one by day, by night the silver—
  Are not more welcome to one that loves the world
  For some fair woman’s sake.
                              I have called you hither
  To save the life of your great master, Seanchan,
  For all day long it has flamed up or flickered
  To the fast cooling hearth.

OLDEST PUPIL.

                              When did he sicken?
  Is it a fever that is wasting him?

KING.

  No fever or sickness. He has chosen death:
  Refusing to eat or drink, that he may bring
  Disgrace upon me; for there is a custom,
  An old and foolish custom, that if a man
  Be wronged, or think that he is wronged, and starve
  Upon another’s threshold till he die,
  The common people, for all time to come,
  Will raise a heavy cry against that threshold,
  Even though it be the King’s.

OLDEST PUPIL.

                               My head whirls round;
  I do not know what I am to think or say.
  I owe you all obedience, and yet
  How can I give it, when the man I have loved
  More than all others, thinks that he is wronged
  So bitterly, that he will starve and die
  Rather than bear it? Is there any man
  Will throw his life away for a light issue?

KING.

  It is but fitting that you take his side
  Until you understand how light an issue
  Has put us by the ears. Three days ago
  I yielded to the outcry of my courtiers—
  Bishops, Soldiers, and Makers of the Law—
  Who long had thought it against their dignity
  For a mere man of words to sit amongst them
  At my own table. When the meal was spread,
  I ordered Seanchan to a lower table;
  And when he pleaded for the poets’ right,
  Established at the establishment of the world,
  I said that I was King, and that all rights
  Had their original fountain in some king,
  And that it was the men who ruled the world,
  And not the men who sang to it, who should sit
  Where there was the most honour. My courtiers—
  Bishops, Soldiers, and Makers of the Law—
  Shouted approval; and amid that noise
  Seanchan went out, and from that hour to this,
  Although there is good food and drink beside him,
  Has eaten nothing.

OLDEST PUPIL.

                    I can breathe again.
  You have taken a great burden from my mind,
  For that old custom’s not worth dying for.

KING.

  Persuade him to eat or drink. Till yesterday
  I thought that hunger and weakness had been enough;
  But finding them too trifling and too light
  To hold his mouth from biting at the grave,
  I called you hither, and all my hope’s in you,
  And certain of his neighbours and good friends
  That I have sent for. While he is lying there
  Perishing, my good name in the world
  Is perishing also. I cannot give way,
  Because I am King. Because if I gave way,
  My Nobles would call me a weakling, and it may be
  The very throne be shaken.

OLDEST PUPIL.

                            I will persuade him.
  Your words had been enough persuasion, King;
  But being lost in sleep or reverie,
  He cannot hear them.

KING.

                        Make him eat or drink.
  Nor is it all because of my good name
  I’d have him do it, for he is a man
  That might well hit the fancy of a king,
  Banished out of his country, or a woman’s,
  Or any other’s that can judge a man
  For what he is. But I that sit a throne,
  And take my measure from the needs of the State,
  Call his wild thought that overruns the measure,
  Making words more than deeds, and his proud will
  That would unsettle all, most mischievous,
  And he himself a most mischievous man.

    [_He turns to go, and then returns again._

  Promise a house with grass and tillage land,
  An annual payment, jewels and silken ware,
  Or anything but that old right of the poets.

    [_He goes into palace._

OLDEST PUPIL.

  The King did wrong to abrogate our right;
  But Seanchan, who talks of dying for it,
  Talks foolishly. Look at us, Seanchan;
  Waken out of your dream and look at us,
  Who have ridden under the moon and all the day,
  Until the moon has all but come again,
  That we might be beside you.

SEANCHAN.

    [_Half turning round, leaning on his elbow, and
    speaking as if in a dream._]

                              I was but now
  In Almhuin, in a great high-raftered house,
  With Finn and Osgar. Odours of roast flesh
  Rose round me, and I saw the roasting-spits;
  And then the dream was broken, and I saw
  Grania dividing salmon by a stream.

OLDEST PUPIL.

  Hunger has made you dream of roasting flesh;
  And though I all but weep to think of it,
  The hunger of the crane, that starves himself
  At the full moon because he is afraid
  Of his own shadow and the glittering water,
  Seems to me little more fantastical
  Than this of yours.

SEANCHAN.

                      Why, that’s the very truth.
  It is as though the moon changed everything—
  Myself and all that I can hear and see;
  For when the heavy body has grown weak,
  There’s nothing that can tether the wild mind
  That, being moonstruck and fantastical,
  Goes where it fancies. I had even thought
  I knew your voice and face, but now the words
  Are so unlikely that I needs must ask
  Who is it that bids me put my hunger by.

OLDEST PUPIL.

  I am your oldest pupil, Seanchan;
  The one that has been with you many years—
  So many, that you said at Candlemas
  That I had almost done with school, and knew
  All but all that poets understand.

SEANCHAN.

  My oldest pupil? No, that cannot be,
  For it is some one of the courtly crowds
  That have been round about me from sunrise,
  And I am tricked by dreams; but I’ll refute them.
  At Candlemas I bid that pupil tell me
  Why poetry is honoured, wishing to know
  If he had any weighty argument
  For distant countries and strange, churlish kings.
  What did he answer?

OLDEST PUPIL.

                      I said the poets hung
  Images of the life that was in Eden
  About the child-bed of the world, that it,
  Looking upon those images, might bear
  Triumphant children. But why must I stand here,
  Repeating an old lesson, while you starve?

SEANCHAN.

  Tell on, for I begin to know the voice.
  What evil thing will come upon the world
  If the Arts perish?

OLDEST PUPIL.

                  If the Arts should perish,
  The world that lacked them would be like a woman,
  That looking on the cloven lips of a hare,
  Brings forth a hare-lipped child.

SEANCHAN.

                            But that’s not all:
  For when I asked you how a man should guard
  Those images, you had an answer also,
  If you’re the man that you have claimed to be,
  Comparing them to venerable things
  God gave to men before he gave them wheat.

OLDEST PUPIL.

  I answered—and the word was half your own—
  That he should guard them as the Men of Dea
  Guard their four treasures, as the Grail King guards
  His holy cup, or the pale, righteous horse
  The jewel that is underneath his horn,
  Pouring out life for it as one pours out
  Sweet heady wine.... But now I understand;
  You would refute me out of my own mouth;
  And yet a place at table, near the King,
  Is nothing of great moment, Seanchan.
  How does so light a thing touch poetry?

    [_SEANCHAN is now sitting up. He still looks dreamily
    in front of him._

SEANCHAN.

  At Candlemas you called this poetry
  One of the fragile, mighty things of God,
  That die at an insult.

OLDEST PUPIL.

    [_To other PUPILS._]

                    Give me some true answer,
  For on that day we spoke about the Court,
  And said that all that was insulted there
  The world insulted, for the Courtly life,
  Being the first comely child of the world,
  Is the world’s model. How shall I answer him?
  Can you not give me some true argument?
  I will not tempt him with a lying one.

YOUNGEST PUPIL.

  O, tell him that the lovers of his music
  Have need of him.

SEANCHAN.

                     But I am labouring
  For some that shall be born in the nick o’ time,
  And find sweet nurture, that they may have voices,
  Even in anger, like the strings of harps;
  And how could they be born to majesty
  If I had never made the golden cradle?

YOUNGEST PUPIL.

    [_Throwing himself at SEANCHAN’S feet._]

  Why did you take me from my father’s fields?
  If you would leave me now, what shall I love?
  Where shall I go? What shall I set my hand to?
  And why have you put music in my ears,
  If you would send me to the clattering houses?
  I will throw down the trumpet and the harp,
  For how could I sing verses or make music
  With none to praise me, and a broken heart?

SEANCHAN.

  What was it that the poets promised you,
  If it was not their sorrow? Do not speak.
  Have I not opened school on these bare steps,
  And are not you the youngest of my scholars?
  And I would have all know that when all falls
  In ruin, poetry calls out in joy,
  Being the scattering hand, the bursting pod,
  The victim’s joy among the holy flame,
  God’s laughter at the shattering of the world.
  And now that joy laughs out, and weeps and burns
  On these bare steps.

YOUNGEST PUPIL.

  O master, do not die!

OLDEST PUPIL.

  Trouble him with no useless argument.
  Be silent! There is nothing we can do
  Except find out the King and kneel to him,
  And beg our ancient right.
                           For here are some
  To say whatever we could say and more,
  And fare as badly. Come, boy, that is no use.

    [_Raises YOUNGEST PUPIL._

  If it seem well that we beseech the King,
  Lay down your harps and trumpets on the stones
  In silence, and come with me silently.
  Come with slow footfalls, and bow all your heads,
  For a bowed head becomes a mourner best.

    [_They lay harps and trumpets down one by one, and then
    go out very solemnly and slowly, following one another.
    Enter MAYOR, TWO CRIPPLES, and BRIAN, an old servant.
    The mayor, who has been heard, before he came upon
    the stage, muttering _‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ etc._,
    crosses in front of SEANCHAN to the other side of the
    steps. BRIAN takes food out of basket. The CRIPPLES are
    watching the basket. The MAYOR has an Ogham stick in
    his hand._

MAYOR.

    [_As he crosses._]

  ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land,’
  Those are the words I have to keep in mind—
  ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land.’
  I have the words. They are all upon the Ogham.
  ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land.’
  But what’s their order?

    [_He keeps muttering over his speech during what
    follows._

FIRST CRIPPLE.

                   The King were rightly served
  If Seanchan drove his good luck away.
  What’s there about a king, that’s in the world
  From birth to burial like another man,
  That he should change old customs, that were in it
  As long as ever the world has been a world?

SECOND CRIPPLE.

  If I were king I would not meddle with him,
  For there is something queer about a poet.
  I knew of one that would be making rhyme
  Under a thorn at crossing of three roads.
  He was as ragged as ourselves, and yet
  He was no sooner dead than every thorn tree
  From Inchy to Kiltartan withered away.

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  The King is but a fool!

MAYOR.

  I am getting ready.

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  A poet has power from beyond the world,
  That he may set our thoughts upon old times,
  And lucky queens and little holy fish
  That rise up every seventh year——

MAYOR.

  Hush! hush!

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  To cure the crippled.

MAYOR.

  I am half ready now.

BRIAN.

  There’s not a mischief I’d begrudge the King
  If it were any other——

MAYOR.

  Hush! I am ready.

BRIAN.

  That died to get it. I have brought out the food,
  And if my master will not eat of it,
  I’ll home and get provision for his wake,
  For that’s no great way off. Well, have your say,
  But don’t be long about it.

MAYOR.

    [_Goes close to SEANCHAN._]

                              Chief Poet of Ireland,
  I am the Mayor of your own town Kinvara,
  And I am come to tell you that the news
  Of this great trouble with the King of Gort
  Has plunged us in deep sorrow—part for you,
  Our honoured townsman, part for our good town.

    [_Begins to hesitate; scratching his head._

  But what comes now? Something about the King.

BRIAN.

  Get on! get on! The food is all set out.

MAYOR.

  Don’t hurry me.

FIRST CRIPPLE.

                  Give us a taste of it.
  He’ll not begrudge it.

SECOND CRIPPLE.

                         Let them that have their limbs
  Starve if they will. We have to keep in mind
  The stomach God has left us.

MAYOR.

                               Hush! I have it!
  The King was said to be most friendly to us,
  And we have reason, as you’ll recollect,
  For thinking that he was about to give
  Those grazing lands inland we so much need,
  Being pinched between the water and the stones.
  Our mowers mow with knives between the stones;
  The sea washes the meadows. You know well
  We have asked nothing but what’s reasonable.

SEANCHAN.

  Reason in plenty. Yellowy white hair,
  A hollow face, and not too many teeth.
  How comes it he has been so long in the world
  And not found Reason out?

    [_While saying this he has turned half round. He hardly
    looks at the MAYOR._

BRIAN.

    [_Trying to pull MAYOR away._]

                          What good is there
  In telling him what he has heard all day!
  I will set food before him.

MAYOR.

    [_Shoving BRIAN away._]

                            Don’t hurry me!
  It’s small respect you’re showing to the town!
  Get farther off! [_To SEANCHAN._] We would not have you think,
  Weighty as these considerations are,
  That they have been as weighty in our minds
  As our desire that one we take much pride in,
  A man that’s been an honour to our town,
  Should live and prosper; therefore we beseech you
  To give way in a matter of no moment,
  A matter of mere sentiment—a trifle—
  That we may always keep our pride in you.

    [_He finishes this speech with a pompous air, motions
    to BRIAN to bring the food to SEANCHAN, and sits on
    seat._

BRIAN.

  Master, master, eat this! It’s not king’s food,
  That’s cooked for everybody and nobody.
  Here’s barley-bread out of your father’s oven,
  And dulse from Duras. Here is the dulse, your honour;
  It’s wholesome, and has the good taste of the sea.

    [_Takes dulse in one hand and bread in other and
    presses them into SEANCHAN’S hands. SEANCHAN shows by
    his movement his different feeling to BRIAN._

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  He has taken it, and there’ll be nothing left!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

  Nothing at all; he wanted his own sort.
  What’s honey to a cat, corn to a dog,
  Or a green apple to a ghost in a churchyard?

SEANCHAN.

    [_Pressing food back into BRIAN’S hands._]

  Eat it yourself, for you have come a journey,
  And it may be eat nothing on the way.

BRIAN.

  How could I eat it, and your honour starving!
  It is your father sends it, and he cried
  Because the stiffness that is in his bones
  Prevented him from coming, and bid me tell you
  That he is old, that he has need of you,
  And that the people will be pointing at him,
  And he not able to lift up his head,
  If you should turn the King’s favour away;
  And he adds to it, that he cared you well,
  And you in your young age, and that it’s right
  That you should care him now.

SEANCHAN.

    [_Who is now interested._]

                              And is that all?
  What did my mother say?

BRIAN.

                          She gave no message;
  For when they told her you had it in mind to starve,
  Or get again the ancient right of the poets,
  She said: ‘No message can do any good.
  He will not send the answer that you want.
  We cannot change him.’ And she went indoors,
  Lay down upon the bed, and turned her face
  Out of the light. And thereupon your father
  Said: ‘Tell him that his mother sends no message,
  Albeit broken down and miserable.’      [_A pause._
  Here’s a pigeon’s egg from Duras, and these others
  Were laid by your own hens.

SEANCHAN.

                              She has sent no message.
  Our mothers know us; they know us to the bone.
  They knew us before birth, and that is why
  They know us even better than the sweethearts
  Upon whose breasts we have lain.
                                   Go quickly! Go
  And tell them that my mother was in the right.
  There is no answer. Go and tell them that.
  Go tell them that she knew me.

MAYOR.

                                 What is he saying?
  I never understood a poet’s talk
  More than the baa of a sheep!

    [_Comes over from seat. SEANCHAN turns away._

                               You have not heard,
  It may be, having been so much away,
  How many of the cattle died last winter
  From lacking grass, and that there was much sickness
  Because the poor have nothing but salt fish
  To live on through the winter?

BRIAN.

                                 Get away,
  And leave the place to me! It’s my turn now,
  For your sack’s empty!

MAYOR.

                        Is it ‘get away’!
  Is that the way I’m to be spoken to!
  Am I not Mayor? Amn’t I authority?
  Amn’t I in the King’s place? Answer me that!

BRIAN.

  Then show the people what a king is like:
  Pull down old merings and root custom up,
  Whitewash the dunghills, fatten hogs and geese,
  Hang your gold chain about an ass’s neck,
  And burn the blessed thorn trees out of the fields,
  And drive what’s comely away!

MAYOR.

  Holy Saint Coleman!

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  Fine talk! fine talk! What else does the King do?
  He fattens hogs and drives the poet away!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

  He starves the song-maker!

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  He fattens geese!

MAYOR.

  How dare you take his name into your mouth!
  How dare you lift your voice against the King!
  What would we be without him?

BRIAN.

                                Why do you praise him?
  I will have nobody speak well of him,
  Or any other king that robs my master.

MAYOR.

  And had he not the right to? and the right
  To strike your master’s head off, being the King,
  Or yours or mine? I say, ‘Long live the King!
  Because he does not take our heads from us.’
  Call out, ‘Long life to him!’

BRIAN.

  Call out for him!

    [_Speaking at same time with MAYOR._

  There’s nobody’ll call out for him,
  But smiths will turn their anvils,
  The millers turn their wheels,
  The farmers turn their churns,
  The witches turn their thumbs,
  ’Till he be broken and splintered into pieces.

MAYOR.

    [_At same time with BRIAN._]

  He might, if he’d a mind to it,
  Be digging out our tongues,
  Or dragging out our hair,
  Or bleaching us like calves,
  Or weaning us like lambs,
  But for the kindness and the softness that is in him.

    [_They gasp for breath._

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  I’ll curse him till I drop!

    [_Speaking at same time as SECOND CRIPPLE and MAYOR and
    BRIAN, who have begun again._

  The curse of the poor be upon him,
  The curse of the widows upon him,
  The curse of the children upon him,
  The curse of the bishops upon him,
  Until he be as rotten as an old mushroom!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

    [_Speaking at same time as FIRST CRIPPLE and MAYOR and
    BRIAN._

  The curse of wrinkles be upon him!
  Wrinkles where his eyes are,
  Wrinkles where his nose is,
  Wrinkles where his mouth is,
  And a little old devil looking out of every wrinkle!

BRIAN.

    [_Speaking at same time with MAYOR and CRIPPLES._]

  And nobody will sing for him,
  And nobody will hunt for him,
  And nobody will fish for him,
  And nobody will pray for him,
  But ever and always curse him and abuse him.

MAYOR.

    [_Speaking at same time with CRIPPLES and BRIAN._]

  What good is in a poet?
  Has he money in a stocking,
  Or cider in the cellar,
  Or flitches in the chimney,
  Or anything anywhere but his own idleness?

    [_BRIAN seizes MAYOR._

MAYOR.

  Help! help! Am I not in authority?

BRIAN.

  That’s how I’ll shout for the King!

MAYOR.

  Help! help! Am I not in the King’s place?

BRIAN.

  I’ll teach him to be kind to the poor!

MAYOR.

  Help! help! Wait till we are in Kinvara!

FIRST CRIPPLE.

    [_Beating MAYOR on the legs with crutch._]

  I’ll shake the royalty out of his legs!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

    [_Burying his nails in MAYOR’S face._]

  I’ll scrumble the ermine out of his skin!

    [_The CHAMBERLAIN comes down steps shouting, ‘_Silence!
    silence! silence!_’_

CHAMBERLAIN.

  How dare you make this uproar at the doors,
  Deafening the very greatest in the land,
  As if the farmyards and the rookeries
  Had all been emptied!

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  It is the Chamberlain.

    [_CRIPPLES go out._

CHAMBERLAIN.

  Pick up the litter there, and get you gone!
  Be quick about it! Have you no respect
  For this worn stair, this all but sacred door,
  Where suppliants and tributary kings
  Have passed, and the world’s glory knelt in silence?
  Have you no reverence for what all other men
  Hold honourable?

BRIAN.

                 If I might speak my mind,
  I’d say the King would have his luck again
  If he would let my master have his rights.

CHAMBERLAIN.

  Pick up your litter! Take your noise away!
  Make haste, and get the clapper from the bell!

BRIAN.

    [_Putting last of food into basket._]

  What do the great and powerful care for rights
  That have no armies!

    [_CHAMBERLAIN begins shoving them out with his staff._

MAYOR.

                  My lord, I am not to blame.
  I’m the King’s man, and they attacked me for it.

BRIAN.

  We have our prayers, our curses and our prayers,
  And we can give a great name or a bad one.

    [_MAYOR is shoving BRIAN out before him with one hand.
    He keeps his face to CHAMBERLAIN, and keeps bowing. The
    CHAMBERLAIN shoves him with his staff._

MAYOR.

  We could not make the poet eat, my lord.

    [_CHAMBERLAIN shoves him with staff._

  Much honoured [_is shoved again_]—honoured to speak with you, my lord;
  But I’ll go find the girl that he’s to marry.
  She’s coming, but I’ll hurry her, my lord.
  Between ourselves, my lord [_is shoved again_], she is a great coaxer.
  Much honoured, my lord. O, she’s the girl to do it;
  For when the intellect is out, my lord,
  Nobody but a woman’s any good.

    [_Is shoved again._

  Much honoured, my lord [_is shoved again_], much honoured, much
        honoured!

    [_Is shoved out, shoving BRIAN out before him._

    [_All through this scene, from the outset of the
    quarrel, SEANCHAN has kept his face turned away, or
    hidden in his cloak. While the CHAMBERLAIN has been
    speaking, the SOLDIER and the MONK have come out of the
    palace. The MONK stands on top of steps at one side,
    SOLDIER a little down steps at the other side. COURT
    LADIES are seen at opening in the palace curtain behind
    SOLDIER. CHAMBERLAIN is in the centre._

CHAMBERLAIN.

    [_To SEANCHAN._]

  Well, you must be contented, for your work
  Has roused the common sort against the King,
  And stolen his authority. The State
  Is like some orderly and reverend house,
  Wherein the master, being dead of a sudden,
  The servants quarrel where they have a mind to,
  And pilfer here and there.

    [_Pause, finding that SEANCHAN does not answer._

                           How many days
  Will you keep up this quarrel with the King,
  And the King’s nobles, and myself, and all,
  Who’d gladly be your friends, if you would let them?

    [_Going near to MONK._

  If you would try, you might persuade him, father.
  I cannot make him answer me, and yet
  If fitting hands would offer him the food,
  He might accept it.

MONK.

                    Certainly I will not.
  I’ve made too many homilies, wherein
  The wanton imagination of the poets
  Has been condemned, to be his flatterer.
  If pride and disobedience are unpunished
  Who will obey?

CHAMBERLAIN.

    [_Going to other side towards SOLDIER._]

               If you would speak to him,
  You might not find persuasion difficult,
  With all the devils of hunger helping you.

SOLDIER.

  I will not interfere, and if he starve
  For being obstinate and stiff in the neck,
  ’Tis but good riddance.

CHAMBERLAIN.

                        One of us must do it.
  It might be, if you’d reason with him, ladies,
  He would eat something, for I have a notion
  That if he brought misfortune on the King,
  Or the King’s house, we’d be as little thought of
  As summer linen when the winter’s come.

FIRST GIRL.

  But it would be the greater compliment
  If Peter’d do it.

SECOND GIRL.

                  Reason with him, Peter.
  Persuade him to eat; he’s such a bag of bones!

SOLDIER.

  I’ll never trust a woman’s word again!
  There’s nobody that was so loud against him
  When he was at the table; now the wind’s changed,
  And you that could not bear his speech or his silence,
  Would have him there in his old place again;
  I do believe you would, but I won’t help you.

SECOND GIRL.

  Why will you be so hard upon us, Peter?
  You know we have turned the common sort against us,
  And he looks miserable.

FIRST GIRL.

                        We cannot dance,
  Because no harper will pluck a string for us.

SECOND GIRL.

  I cannot sleep with thinking of his face.

FIRST GIRL.

  And I love dancing more than anything.

SECOND GIRL.

  Do not be hard on us; but yesterday
  A woman in the road threw stones at me.
  You would not have me stoned?

FIRST GIRL.

  May I not dance?

SOLDIER.

  I will do nothing. You have put him out,
  And now that he is out—well, leave him out.

FIRST GIRL.

  Do it for my sake, Peter.

SECOND GIRL.

  And for mine.

    [_Each girl as she speaks takes PETER’S hand with her
    right hand, stroking down his arm with her left. While
    SECOND GIRL is stroking his arm, FIRST GIRL leaves go
    and gives him the dish._

SOLDIER.

  Well, well; but not your way. [_To SEANCHAN._] Here’s meat for you.
  It has been carried from too good a table
  For men like you, and I am offering it
  Because these women have made a fool of me.

    [_A pause._

  You mean to starve? You will have none of it?
  I’ll leave it there, where you can sniff the savour.
  Snuff it, old hedgehog, and unroll yourself!
  But if I were the King, I’d make you do it
  With wisps of lighted straw.

SEANCHAN.

                   You have rightly named me.
  I lie rolled up under the ragged thorns
  That are upon the edge of those great waters
  Where all things vanish away, and I have heard
  Murmurs that are the ending of all sound.
  I am out of life; I am rolled up, and yet,
  Hedgehog although I am, I’ll not unroll
  For you, King’s dog! Go to the King, your master.
  Crouch down and wag your tail, for it may be
  He has nothing now against you, and I think
  The stripes of your last beating are all healed.

    [_The SOLDIER has drawn his sword._

CHAMBERLAIN.

    [_Striking up sword._]

  Put up your sword, sir; put it up, I say!
  The common sort would tear you into pieces
  If you but touched him.

SOLDIER.

                        If he’s to be flattered,
  Petted, cajoled, and dandled into humour,
  We might as well have left him at the table.

    [_Goes to one side sheathing sword._

SEANCHAN.

  You must need keep your patience yet awhile,
  For I have some few mouthfuls of sweet air
  To swallow before I have grown to be as civil
  As any other dust.

CHAMBERLAIN.

                   You wrong us, Seanchan.
  There is none here but holds you in respect;
  And if you’d only eat out of this dish,
  The King would show how much he honours you.

    [_Bowing and smiling._

  Who could imagine you’d so take to heart
  Being put from the high table? I am certain
  That you, if you will only think it over,
  Will understand that it is men of law,
  Leaders of the King’s armies, and the like,
  That should sit there.

SEANCHAN.

                          Somebody has deceived you,
  Or maybe it was your own eyes that lied,
  In making it appear that I was driven
  From the King’s table. You have driven away
  The images of them that weave a dance
  By the four rivers in the mountain garden.

CHAMBERLAIN.

  You mean we have driven poetry away.
  But that’s not altogether true, for I,
  As you should know, have written poetry.
  And often when the table has been cleared,
  And candles lighted, the King calls for me,
  And I repeat it him. My poetry
  Is not to be compared with yours; but still,
  Where I am honoured, poetry is honoured—
  In some measure.

SEANCHAN.

                  If you are a poet,
  Cry out that the King’s money would not buy,
  Nor the high circle consecrate his head,
  If poets had never christened gold, and even
  The moon’s poor daughter, that most whey-faced metal,
  Precious; and cry out that none alive
  Would ride among the arrows with high heart,
  Or scatter with an open hand, had not
  Our heady craft commended wasteful virtues.
  And when that story’s finished, shake your coat
  Where little jewels gleam on it, and say,
  A herdsman, sitting where the pigs had trampled,
  Made up a song about enchanted kings,
  Who were so finely dressed, one fancied them
  All fiery, and women by the churn
  And children by the hearth caught up the song
  And murmured it, until the tailors heard it.

CHAMBERLAIN.

  If you would but eat something you’d find out
  That you have had these thoughts from lack of food,
  For hunger makes us feverish.

SEANCHAN.

                                Cry aloud,
  That when we are driven out we come again
  Like a great wind that runs out of the waste
  To blow the tables flat; and thereupon
  Lie down upon the threshold till the King
  Restore to us the ancient right of the poets.

MONK.

  You cannot shake him. I will to the King,
  And offer him consolation in his trouble,
  For that man there has set his teeth to die.
  And being one that hates obedience,
  Discipline, and orderliness of life,
  I cannot mourn him.

FIRST GIRL.

                      ’Twas you that stirred it up.
  You stirred it up that you might spoil our dancing.
  Why shouldn’t we have dancing? We’re not in Lent.
  Yet nobody will pipe or play to us;
  And they will never do it if he die.
  And that is why you are going.

MONK.

  What folly’s this?

FIRST GIRL.

  Well, if you did not do it, speak to him—
  Use your authority; make him obey you.
  What harm is there in dancing?

MONK.

                                Hush! begone!
  Go to the fields and watch the hurley players,
  Or any other place you have a mind to.
  This is not woman’s work.

FIRST GIRL.

                            Come! let’s away!
  We can do nothing here.

MONK.

                          The pride of the poets!
  Dancing, hurling, the country full of noise,
  And King and Church neglected. Seanchan,
  I’ll take my leave, for you are perishing
  Like all that let the wanton imagination
  Carry them where it will, and it’s not likely
  I’ll look upon your living face again.

SEANCHAN.

  Come nearer, nearer!

MONK.

  Have you some last wish?

SEANCHAN.

  Stoop down, for I would whisper it in your ear.
  Has that wild God of yours, that was so wild
  When you’d but lately taken the King’s pay,
  Grown any tamer? He gave you all much trouble.

MONK.

  Let go my habit!

SEANCHAN.

                  Have you persuaded him
  To chirp between two dishes when the King
  Sits down to table?

MONK.

  Let go my habit, sir!

    [_Crosses to centre of stage._

SEANCHAN.

  And maybe he has learnt to sing quite softly
  Because loud singing would disturb the King,
  Who is sitting drowsily among his friends
  After the table has been cleared. Not yet!

    [_SEANCHAN has been dragged some feet clinging to the
    MONK’S habit._

  You did not think that hands so full of hunger
  Could hold you tightly. They are not civil yet.
  I’d know if you have taught him to eat bread
  From the King’s hand, and perch upon his finger.
  I think he perches on the King’s strong hand.
  But it may be that he is still too wild.
  You must not weary in your work; a king
  Is often weary, and he needs a God
  To be a comfort to him.

    [_The MONK plucks his habit away and goes into palace.
    SEANCHAN holds up his hand as if a bird perched upon
    it. He pretends to stroke the bird._

                          A little God,
  With comfortable feathers, and bright eyes.

FIRST GIRL.

  There will be no more dancing in our time,
  For nobody will play the harp or the fiddle.
  Let us away, for we cannot amend it,
  And watch the hurley.

SECOND GIRL.

  Hush! he is looking at us.

SEANCHAN.

  Yes, yes, go to the hurley, go to the hurley,
  Go to the hurley! Gather up your skirts—
  Run quickly! You can remember many love songs;
  I know it by the light that’s in your eyes—
  But you’ll forget them. You’re fair to look upon.
  Your feet delight in dancing, and your mouths
  In the slow smiling that awakens love.
  The mothers that have borne you mated rightly.
  They’d little ears as thirsty as your ears
  For many love songs. Go to the young men.
  Are not the ruddy flesh and the thin flanks
  And the broad shoulders worthy of desire?
  Go from me! Here is nothing for your eyes.
  But it is I that am singing you away—
  Singing you to the young men.

    [_The TWO YOUNG PRINCESSES come out of palace. While he
    has been speaking the GIRLS have shrunk back holding
    each other’s hands._

FIRST GIRL.

                                Be quiet!
  Look who it is has come out of the house.
  Princesses, we are for the hurling field.
  Will you go there?

FIRST PRINCESS.

                    We will go with you, Aileen.
  But we must have some words with Seanchan,
  For we have come to make him eat and drink.

CHAMBERLAIN.

  I will hold out the dish and cup for him
  While you are speaking to him of his folly,
  If you desire it, Princess.

    [_He has taken dish and cup._

FIRST PRINCESS.

                            No, Finula
  Will carry him the dish and I the cup.
  We’ll offer them ourselves.

    [_They take cup and dish._

FIRST GIRL.

                            They are so gracious;
  The dear little Princesses are so gracious.

    [_PRINCESS holds out her hand for SEANCHAN to kiss it.
    He does not move._

  Although she is holding out her hand to him,
  He will not kiss it.

FIRST PRINCESS.

                      My father bids us say
  That, though he cannot have you at his table,
  You may ask any other thing you like
  And he will give it you. We carry you
  With our own hands a dish and cup of wine.

FIRST GIRL.

  O, look! he has taken it! He has taken it!
  The dear Princesses! I have always said
  That nobody could refuse them anything.

    [_SEANCHAN takes the cup in one hand. In the other he
    holds for a moment the hand of the PRINCESS._

SEANCHAN.

  O long, soft fingers and pale finger-tips,
  Well worthy to be laid in a king’s hand!
  O, you have fair white hands, for it is certain
  There is uncommon whiteness in these hands.
  But there is something comes into my mind,
  Princess. A little while before your birth,
  I saw your mother sitting by the road
  In a high chair; and when a leper passed,
  She pointed him the way into the town.
  He lifted up his hand and blessed her hand—
  I saw it with my own eyes. Hold out your hands;
  I will find out if they are contaminated,
  For it has come into my thoughts that maybe
  The King has sent me food and drink by hands
  That are contaminated. I would see all your hands.
  You’ve eyes of dancers; but hold out your hands,
  For it may be there are none sound among you.

    [_The PRINCESSES have shrunk back in terror._

FIRST PRINCESS.

  He has called us lepers.

    [_SOLDIER draws sword._

CHAMBERLAIN.

                        He’s out of his mind,
  And does not know the meaning of what he said.

SEANCHAN.

    [_Standing up._]

  There’s no sound hand among you—no sound hand.
  Away with you! away with all of you!
  You are all lepers! There is leprosy
  Among the plates and dishes that you have carried.
  And wherefore have you brought me leper’s wine?

    [_He flings the contents of the cup in their faces._

  There, there! I have given it to you again. And now
  Begone, or I will give my curse to you.
  You have the leper’s blessing, but you think
  Maybe the bread will something lack in savour
  Unless you mix my curse into the dough.

    [_They go out hurriedly in all directions. SEANCHAN is
    staggering in the middle of the stage._

  Where did I say the leprosy had come from?
  I said it came out of a leper’s hand,

    _Enter CRIPPLES._

  And that he walked the highway. But that’s folly,
  For he was walking up there in the sky.
  And there he is even now, with his white hand
  Thrust out of the blue air, and blessing them
  With leprosy.

FIRST CRIPPLE.

                He’s pointing at the moon
  That’s coming out up yonder, and he calls it
  Leprous, because the daylight whitens it.

SEANCHAN.

  He’s holding up his hand above them all—
  King, noblemen, princesses—blessing all.
  Who could imagine he’d have so much patience?

FIRST CRIPPLE.

    [_Clutching the other CRIPPLE._]

  Come out of this!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

    [_Pointing to food._]

                  If you don’t need it, sir,
  May we not carry some of it away?

    [_They cross towards food and pass in front of
    SEANCHAN._

SEANCHAN.

  Who’s speaking? Who are you?

FIRST CRIPPLE.

  Come out of this!

SECOND CRIPPLE.

  Have pity on us, that must beg our bread
  From table to table throughout the entire world,
  And yet be hungry.

SEANCHAN.

                      But why were you born crooked?
  What bad poet did your mothers listen to
  That you were born so crooked?

CRIPPLE.

                                Come away!
  Maybe he’s cursed the food, and it might kill us.

OTHER CRIPPLE.

  Yes, better come away.

    [_They go out._

SEANCHAN.

    [_Staggering, and speaking wearily._]

                        He has great strength
  And great patience to hold his right hand there,
  Uplifted, and not wavering about.
  He is much stronger than I am, much stronger.

    [_Sinks down on steps. Enter MAYOR and FEDELM._

FEDELM.

    [_Her finger on her lips._]

  Say nothing! I will get him out of this
  Before I have said a word of food and drink;
  For while he is on this threshold and can hear,
  It may be, the voices that made mock of him,
  He would not listen. I’d be alone with him.

    [_MAYOR goes out. FEDELM goes to SEANCHAN and kneels
    before him._

  Seanchan! Seanchan!

    [_He remains looking into the sky._

                      Can you not hear me, Seanchan?
  It is myself.

    [_He looks at her, dreamily at first, then takes her
    hand._

SEANCHAN.

                Is this your hand, Fedelm?
  I have been looking at another hand
  That is up yonder.

FEDELM.

  I have come for you.

SEANCHAN.

  Fedelm, I did not know that you were here.

FEDELM.

  And can you not remember that I promised
  That I would come and take you home with me
  When I’d the harvest in? And now I’ve come,
  And you must come away, and come on the instant.

SEANCHAN.

  Yes, I will come. But is the harvest in?
  This air has got a summer taste in it.

FEDELM.

  But is not the wild middle of the summer
  A better time to marry? Come with me now!

SEANCHAN.

    [_Seizing her by both wrists._]

  Who taught you that? For it’s a certainty,
  Although I never knew it till last night,
  That marriage, because it is the height of life,
  Can only be accomplished to the full
  In the high days of the year. I lay awake:
  There had come a frenzy into the light of the stars,
  And they were coming nearer, and I knew
  All in a minute they were about to marry
  Clods out upon the ploughlands, to beget
  A mightier race than any that has been.
  But some that are within there made a noise,
  And frighted them away.

FEDELM.

                          Come with me now!
  We have far to go, and daylight’s running out.

SEANCHAN.

  The stars had come so near me that I caught
  Their singing. It was praise of that great race
  That would be haughty, mirthful, and white-bodied,
  With a high head, and open hand, and how,
  Laughing, it would take the mastery of the world.

FEDELM.

  But you will tell me all about their songs
  When we’re at home. You have need of rest and care,
  And I can give them you when we’re at home.
  And therefore let us hurry, and get us home.

SEANCHAN.

  It’s certain that there is some trouble here,
  Although it’s gone out of my memory.
  And I would get away from it. Give me your help.      [_Trying to rise._
  But why are not my pupils here to help me?
  Go, call my pupils, for I need their help.

FEDELM.

  Come with me now, and I will send for them,
  For I have a great room that’s full of beds
  I can make ready; and there is a smooth lawn
  Where they can play at hurley and sing poems
  Under an apple-tree.

SEANCHAN.

                      I know that place:
  An apple-tree, and a smooth level lawn
  Where the young men can sway their hurley sticks.

[_Sings._]

  The four rivers that run there,
  Through well-mown level ground,
  Have come out of a blessed well
  That is all bound and wound
  By the great roots of an apple,
  And all the fowl of the air
  Have gathered in the wide branches
  And keep singing there.

    [_FEDELM, troubled, has covered her eyes with her
    hands._

FEDELM.

  No, there are not four rivers, and those rhymes
  Praise Adam’s paradise.

SEANCHAN.

                         I can remember now,
  It’s out of a poem I made long ago
  About the Garden in the East of the World,
  And how spirits in the images of birds
  Crowd in the branches of old Adam’s crabtree.
  They come before me now, and dig in the fruit
  With so much gluttony, and are so drunk
  With that harsh wholesome savour, that their feathers
  Are clinging one to another with the juice.
  But you would lead me to some friendly place,
  And I would go there quickly.

FEDELM.

    [_Helping him to rise._]

  Come with me.

    _He walks slowly, supported by her, till he comes to
    table._

SEANCHAN.

  But why am I so weak? Have I been ill?
  Sweetheart, why is it that I am so weak?

    [_Sinks on to seat._

FEDELM.

    [_Goes to table._]

  I’ll dip this piece of bread into the wine,
  For that will make you stronger for the journey.

SEANCHAN.

  Yes, give me bread and wine; that’s what I want,
  For it is hunger that is gnawing me.

    [_He takes bread from FEDELM, hesitates, and then
    thrusts it back into her hand._

  But, no; I must not eat it.

FEDELM.

                             Eat, Seanchan.
  For if you do not eat it you will die.

SEANCHAN.

  Why did you give me food? Why did you come?
  For had I not enough to fight against
  Without your coming?

FEDELM.

                      Eat this little crust,
  Seanchan, if you have any love for me.

SEANCHAN.

  I must not eat it—but that’s beyond your wit.
  Child! child! I must not eat it, though I die.

FEDELM.

    [_Passionately._]

  You do not know what love is; for if you loved,
  You would put every other thought away.
  But you have never loved me.

SEANCHAN.

    [_Seizing her by wrist._]

                              You, a child,
  Who have but seen a man out of the window,
  Tell me that I know nothing about love,
  And that I do not love you! Did I not say
  There was a frenzy in the light of the stars
  All through the livelong night, and that the night
  Was full of marriages? But that fight’s over,
  And all that’s done with, and I have to die.

FEDELM.

    [_Throwing her arms about him._]

  I will not be put from you, although I think
  I had not grudged it you if some great lady,
  If the King’s daughter, had set out your bed.
  I will not give you up to death; no, no!
  And are not these white arms and this soft neck
  Better than the brown earth?

SEANCHAN.

    [_Struggling to disengage himself._]

                              Begone from me!
  There’s treachery in those arms and in that voice.
  They’re all against me. Why do you linger there?
  How long must I endure the sight of you?

FEDELM.

  O, Seanchan! Seanchan!

SEANCHAN.

    [_Rising._]

                        Go where you will,
  So it be out of sight and out of mind.
  I cast you from me like an old torn cap,
  A broken shoe, a glove without a finger,
  A crooked penny; whatever is most worthless.

FEDELM.

    [_Bursts into tears._]

  O, do not drive me from you!

SEANCHAN.

    [_Takes her in his arms._]

                               What did I say,
  My dove of the woods? I was about to curse you.
  It was a frenzy. I’ll unsay it all.
  But you must go away.

FEDELM.

                        Let me be near you.
  I will obey like any married wife.
  Let me but lie before your feet.

SEANCHAN.

  Come nearer.

    [_Kisses her._

  If I had eaten when you bid me, sweetheart,
  The kiss of multitudes in times to come
  Had been the poorer.

    [_Enter KING from palace, followed by the two
    PRINCESSES._

KING.

    [_To FEDELM._]

  Has he eaten yet?

FEDELM.

  No, King, and will not till you have restored
  The right of the poets.

KING.

    [_Coming down and standing before SEANCHAN._]

                          Seanchan, you have refused
  Everybody that I have sent, and now
  I come to you myself; and I have come
  To bid you put your pride as far away
  As I have put my pride. I had your love
  Not a great while ago, and now you have planned
  To put a voice by every cottage fire,
  And in the night when no one sees who cries,
  To cry against me till my throne has crumbled.
  And yet if I give way I must offend
  My courtiers and nobles till they, too,
  Strike at the crown. What would you have of me?

SEANCHAN.

  When did the poets promise safety, King?

KING.

  Seanchan, I bring you bread in my own hands,
  And bid you eat because of all these reasons,
  And for this further reason, that I love you.

    [_SEANCHAN pushes bread away, with FEDELM’S hand._

  You have refused it, Seanchan?

SEANCHAN.

  We have refused it.

KING.

  I have been patient, though I am a king,
  And have the means to force you. But that’s ended,
  And I am but a king, and you a subject.
  Nobles and courtiers, bring the poets hither;

    [_Enter COURT LADIES, MONK, SOLDIER, CHAMBERLAIN, and
    COURTIERS with PUPILS, who have halters round their
    necks._

  For you can have your way. I that was man,
  With a man’s heart, am now all king again,
  Remembering that the seed I come of, though
  A hundred kings have sown it and resown it,
  Has neither trembled nor shrunk backward yet
  Because of the hard business of a king.
  Speak to your master; beg your life of him;
  Show him the halter that is round your necks.
  If his heart’s set upon it, he may die;
  But you shall all die with him.      [_Goes up steps._
                                 Beg your lives!
  Begin, for you have little time to lose.
  Begin it, you that are the oldest pupil.

OLDEST PUPIL.

  Die, Seanchan, and proclaim the right of the poets.

KING.

  Silence! you are as crazy as your master.
  But that young boy, that seems the youngest of you,
  I’d have him speak. Kneel down before him, boy;
  Hold up your hands to him, that you may pluck
  That milky-coloured neck out of the noose.

YOUNGEST PUPIL.

  Die, Seanchan, and proclaim the right of the poets.

OLDEST PUPIL.

  Gather the halters up into your hands
  And drive us where you will, for in all things,
  But in our Art, we are obedient.

    [_They hold the ends of the halter towards the KING.
    The KING comes slowly down steps._

KING.

  Kneel down, kneel down; he has the greater power.
  There is no power but has its root in his—
  I understand it now. There is no power
  But his that can withhold the crown or give it,
  Or make it reverend in the eyes of men,
  And therefore I have laid it in his hands,
  And I will do his will.

    [_He has put the crown into SEANCHAN’S hands._

SEANCHAN.

    [_Who has been assisted to rise by his pupils._]

                         O crown! O crown!
  It is but right the hands that made the crown
  In the old time should give it where they please.

    [_He places the crown on the KING’S head._

  O silver trumpets! Be you lifted up,
  And cry to the great race that is to come.
  Long-throated swans, amid the waves of Time,
  Sing loudly, for beyond the wall of the world
  It waits, and it may hear and come to us.

    [_The PUPILS blow a trumpet blast._]
﻿ON BAILE’S STRAND




  TO WILLIAM FAY

  BECAUSE OF THE BEAUTIFUL PHANTASY OF HIS
  PLAYING IN THE CHARACTER OF
  THE FOOL




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


  A FOOL
  A BLIND MAN
  CUCHULAIN, _King of Muirthemne_
  CONCHUBAR, _High King of Ulad_
  A YOUNG MAN, _Son of Cuchulain_
  KINGS AND SINGING WOMEN




ON BAILE’S STRAND


    _A great hall at Dundealgan, not ‘Cuchulain’s great
    ancient house’ but an assembly house nearer to the
    sea. A big door at the back, and through the door
    misty light as of sea mist. There are many chairs and
    one long bench. One of these chairs, which is towards
    the front of the stage, is bigger than the others.
    Somewhere at the back there is a table with flagons of
    ale upon it and drinking-horns. There is a small door
    at one side of the hall. A FOOL and BLIND MAN, both
    ragged, come in through the door at the back. The BLIND
    MAN leans upon a staff._

FOOL.

WHAT a clever man you are though you are blind! There’s nobody with two
eyes in his head that is as clever as you are. Who but you could have
thought that the henwife sleeps every day a little at noon? I would
never be able to steal anything if you didn’t tell me where to look
for it. And what a good cook you are! You take the fowl out of my hands
after I have stolen it and plucked it, and you put it into the big pot
at the fire there, and I can go out and run races with the witches
at the edge of the waves and get an appetite, and when I’ve got it,
there’s the hen waiting inside for me, done to the turn.

BLIND MAN.

    [_Who is feeling about with his stick._]

Done to the turn.

FOOL.

    [_Putting his arm round_ BLIND MAN’S _neck._]

Come now, I’ll have a leg and you’ll have a leg, and we’ll draw lots
for the wish-bone. I’ll be praising you, I’ll be praising you, while
we’re eating it, for your good plans and for your good cooking. There’s
nobody in the world like you, Blind Man. Come, come. Wait a minute. I
shouldn’t have closed the door. There are some that look for me, and I
wouldn’t like them not to find me. Don’t tell it to anybody, Blind Man.
There are some that follow me. Boann herself out of the river and Fand
out of the deep sea. Witches they are, and they come by in the wind,
and they cry, ‘Give a kiss, Fool, give a kiss,’ that’s what they cry.
That’s wide enough. All the witches can come in now. I wouldn’t have
them beat at the door and say: ‘Where is the Fool? Why has he put a
lock on the door?’ Maybe they’ll hear the bubbling of the pot and come
in and sit on the ground. But we won’t give them any of the fowl. Let
them go back to the sea, let them go back to the sea.

BLIND MAN.

    [_Feeling legs of big chair with his hands._]

Ah! [_Then, in a louder voice as he feels the back of it._] Ah—ah—

FOOL.

Why do you say ‘Ah-ah’?

BLIND MAN.

I know the big chair. It is to-day the High King Conchubar is coming.
They have brought out his chair. He is going to be Cuchulain’s master
in earnest from this day out. It is that he’s coming for.

FOOL.

He must be a great man to be Cuchulain’s master.

BLIND MAN.

So he is. He is a great man. He is over all the rest of the kings of
Ireland.

FOOL.

Cuchulain’s master! I thought Cuchulain could do anything he liked.

BLIND MAN.

So he did, so he did. But he ran too wild, and Conchubar is coming
to-day to put an oath upon him that will stop his rambling and make him
as biddable as a house-dog and keep him always at his hand. He will sit
in this chair and put the oath upon him.

FOOL.

How will he do that?

BLIND MAN.

You have no wits to understand such things. [_The BLIND MAN has got
into the chair._] He will sit up in this chair and he’ll say: ‘Take the
oath, Cuchulain. I bid you take the oath. Do as I tell you. What are
your wits compared with mine, and what are your riches compared with
mine? And what sons have you to pay your debts and to put a stone over
you when you die? Take the oath, I tell you. Take a strong oath.’

FOOL.

    [_Crumpling himself up and whining._]

I will not. I’ll take no oath. I want my dinner.

BLIND MAN.

Hush, hush! It is not done yet.

FOOL.

You said it was done to a turn.

BLIND MAN.

Did I, now? Well, it might be done, and not done. The wings might be
white, but the legs might be red. The flesh might stick hard to the
bones and not come away in the teeth. But, believe me, Fool, it will be
well done before you put your teeth in it.

FOOL.

My teeth are growing long with the hunger.

BLIND MAN.

I’ll tell you a story—the kings have story-tellers while they are
waiting for their dinner—I will tell you a story with a fight in it, a
story with a champion in it, and a ship and a queen’s son that has his
mind set on killing somebody that you and I know.

FOOL.

Who is that? Who is he coming to kill?

BLIND MAN.

Wait, now, till you hear. When you were stealing the fowl, I was lying
in a hole in the sand, and I heard three men coming with a shuffling
sort of noise. They were wounded and groaning.

FOOL.

Go on. Tell me about the fight.

BLIND MAN.

There had been a fight, a great fight, a tremendous great fight. A
young man had landed on the shore, the guardians of the shore had asked
his name, and he had refused to tell it, and he had killed one, and
others had run away.

FOOL.

That’s enough. Come on now to the fowl. I wish it was bigger. I wish it
was as big as a goose.

BLIND MAN.

Hush! I haven’t told you all. I know who that young man is. I heard the
men who were running away say he had red hair, that he had come from
Aoife’s country, that he was coming to kill Cuchulain.

FOOL.

Nobody can do that.

[_To a tune._]

        Cuchulain has killed kings,
        Kings and sons of kings,
        Dragons out of the water,
        And witches out of the air,
  Banachas and Bonachas and people of the woods.

BLIND MAN.

Hush! hush!

FOOL.

    [_Still singing._]

  Witches that steal the milk,
  Fomor that steal the children,
  Hags that have heads like hares,
  Hares that have claws like witches,
  All riding a-cockhorse

    [_Spoken._]

Out of the very bottom of the bitter black north.

BLIND MAN.

Hush, I say!

FOOL.

Does Cuchulain know that he is coming to kill him?

BLIND MAN.

How would he know that with his head in the clouds? He doesn’t care for
common fighting. Why would he put himself out, and nobody in it but
that young man? Now, if it were a white fawn that might turn into a
queen before morning—

FOOL.

Come to the fowl. I wish it was as big as a pig; a fowl with goose
grease and pig’s crackling.

BLIND MAN.

No hurry, no hurry. I know whose son it is. I wouldn’t tell anybody
else, but I will tell you,—a secret is better to you than your dinner.
You like being told secrets.

FOOL.

Tell me the secret.

BLIND MAN.

That young man is Aoife’s son. I am sure it is Aoife’s son, it flows
in upon me that it is Aoife’s son. You have often heard me talking of
Aoife, the great woman-fighter Cuchulain got the mastery over in the
north?

FOOL.

I know, I know. She is one of those cross queens that live in hungry
Scotland.

BLIND MAN.

I am sure it is her son. I was in Aoife’s country for a long time.

FOOL.

That was before you were blinded for putting a curse upon the wind.

BLIND MAN.

There was a boy in her house that had her own red colour on him
and everybody said he was to be brought up to kill Cuchulain, that
she hated Cuchulain. She used to put a helmet on a pillar-stone
and call it Cuchulain and set him casting at it. There is a step
outside—Cuchulain’s step.

    [_CUCHULAIN passes by in the mist outside the big door._

FOOL.

Where is Cuchulain going?

BLIND MAN.

He is going to meet Conchubar that has bidden him to take the oath.

FOOL.

Ah, an oath, Blind Man. How can I remember so many things at once? Who
is going to take an oath?

BLIND MAN.

Cuchulain is going to take an oath to Conchubar who is High King.

FOOL.

What a mix-up you make of everything, Blind Man. You were telling me
one story, and now you are telling me another story.... How can I get
the hang of it at the end if you mix everything at the beginning?
Wait till I settle it out. There now, there’s Cuchulain [_he points
to one foot_], and there is the young man [_he points to the other
foot_] that is coming to kill him, and Cuchulain doesn’t know. But
where’s Conchubar? [_Takes bag from side._] That’s Conchubar with all
his riches—Cuchulain, young man, Conchubar—And where’s Aoife? [_Throws
up cap._] There is Aoife, high up on the mountains in high hungry
Scotland. Maybe it is not true after all. Maybe it was your own making
up. It’s many a time you cheated me before with your lies. Come to the
cooking-pot, my stomach is pinched and rusty. Would you have it to be
creaking like a gate?

BLIND MAN.

I tell you it’s true. And more than that is true. If you listen to what
I say, you’ll forget your stomach.

FOOL.

I won’t.

BLIND MAN.

Listen. I know who the young man’s father is, but I won’t say. I would
be afraid to say. Ah, Fool, you would forget everything if you could
know who the young man’s father is.

FOOL.

Who is it? Tell me now quick, or I’ll shake you. Come, out with it, or
I’ll shake you.

    [A murmur of voices in the distance.

BLIND MAN.

Wait, wait. There’s somebody coming.... It is Cuchulain is coming.
He’s coming back with the High King. Go and ask Cuchulain. He’ll tell
you. It’s little you’ll care about the cooking-pot when you have asked
Cuchulain that....

    [_BLIND MAN goes out by side door._

FOOL.

I’ll ask him. Cuchulain will know. He was in Aoife’s country. [_Goes
up stage._] I’ll ask him. [_Turns and goes down stage._] But, no. I
won’t ask him, I would be afraid. [_Going up again._] Yes, I will ask
him. What harm in asking? The Blind Man said I was to ask him. [_Going
down._] No, no. I’ll not ask him. He might kill me. I have but killed
hens and geese and pigs. He has killed kings. [_Goes up again almost to
big door._] Who says I’m afraid? I’m not afraid. I’m no coward. I’ll
ask him. No, no, Cuchulain, I’m not going to ask you.

            He has killed kings,
            Kings and the sons of kings,
            Dragons out of the water,
            And witches out of the air,
  Banachas and Bonachas and people of the woods.

    [FOOL goes out by side door, the last words being heard
    outside. CUCHULAIN and CONCHUBAR enter through the
    big door at the back. While they are still outside,
    CUCHULAIN’S voice is heard raised in anger. He is a
    dark man, something over forty years of age. CONCHUBAR
    is much older and carries a long staff, elaborately
    carved, or with an elaborate gold handle.

CUCHULAIN.

  Because I have killed men without your bidding
  And have rewarded others at my own pleasure,
  Because of half a score of trifling things
  You’d lay this oath upon me, and now—and now
  You add another pebble to the heap.
  And I must be your man, well-nigh your bondsman,
  Because a youngster out of Aoife’s country
  Has found the shore ill-guarded.

CONCHUBAR.

                                   He came to land
  While you were somewhere out of sight and hearing,
  Hunting or dancing with your wild companions.

CUCHULAIN.

  He can be driven out. I’ll not be bound.
  I’ll dance or hunt, or quarrel or make love,
  Wherever and whenever I’ve a mind to.
  If time had not put water in your blood,
  You never would have thought it.

CONCHUBAR.

                                  I would leave
  A strong and settled country to my children.

CUCHULAIN.

  And I must be obedient in all things;
  Give up my will to yours; go where you please;
  Come when you call; sit at the council-board
  Among the unshapely bodies of old men.
  I whose mere name has kept this country safe,
  I that in early days have driven out
  Maeve of Cruachan and the northern pirates,
  The hundred kings of Sorcha, and the kings
  Out of the Garden in the East of the World.
  Must I, that held you on the throne when all
  Had pulled you from it, swear obedience
  As if I were some cattle-raising king?
  Are my shins speckled with the heat of the fire,
  Or have my hands no skill but to make figures
  Upon the ashes with a stick? Am I
  So slack and idle that I need a whip
  Before I serve you?

CONCHUBAR.

                     No, no whip, Cuchulain,
  But every day my children come and say:
  ‘This man is growing harder to endure.
  How can we be at safety with this man
  That nobody can buy or bid or bind?
  We shall be at his mercy when you are gone;
  He burns the earth as if he were a fire,
  And time can never touch him.’

CUCHULAIN.

                              And so the tale
  Grows finer yet; and I am to obey
  Whatever child you set upon the throne,
  As if it were yourself!

CONCHUBAR.

                         Most certainly.
  I am High King, my son shall be High King;
  And you for all the wildness of your blood,
  And though your father came out of the sun,
  Are but a little king and weigh but light
  In anything that touches government,
  If put into the balance with my children.

CUCHULAIN.

  It’s well that we should speak our minds out plainly,
  For when we die we shall be spoken of
  In many countries. We in our young days
  Have seen the heavens like a burning cloud
  Brooding upon the world, and being more
  Than men can be now that cloud’s lifted up,
  We should be the more truthful. Conchubar,
  I do not like your children—they have no pith,
  No marrow in their bones, and will lie soft
  Where you and I lie hard.

CONCHUBAR.

                           You rail at them
  Because you have no children of your own.

CUCHULAIN.

  I think myself most lucky that I leave
  No pallid ghost or mockery of a man
  To drift and mutter in the corridors,
  Where I have laughed and sung.

CONCHUBAR.

                               That is not true,
  For all your boasting of the truth between us;
  For, there is no man having house and lands,
  That have been in the one family
  And called by the one name for centuries,
  But is made miserable if he know
  They are to pass into a stranger’s keeping,
  As yours will pass.

CUCHULAIN.

                     The most of men feel that,
  But you and I leave names upon the harp.

CONCHUBAR.

  You play with arguments as lawyers do,
  And put no heart in them. I know your thoughts,
  For we have slept under the one cloak and drunk
  From the one wine cup. I know you to the bone.
  I have heard you cry, aye in your very sleep,
  ‘I have no son,’ and with such bitterness
  That I have gone upon my knees and prayed
  That it might be amended.

CUCHULAIN.

                          For you thought
  That I should be as biddable as others
  Had I their reason for it; but that’s not true,
  For I would need a weightier argument
  Than one that marred me in the copying,
  As I have that clean hawk out of the air
  That, as men say, begot this body of mine
  Upon a mortal woman.

CONCHUBAR.

                      Now as ever
  You mock at every reasonable hope,
  And would have nothing, or impossible things.
  What eye has ever looked upon the child
  Would satisfy a mind like that?

CUCHULAIN.

                                 I would leave
  My house and name to none that would not face
  Even myself in battle.

CONCHUBAR.

                        Being swift of foot,
  And making light of every common chance,
  You should have overtaken on the hills
  Some daughter of the air, or on the shore
  A daughter of the Country-under-Wave.

CUCHULAIN.

  I am not blasphemous.

CONCHUBAR.

                        Yet you despise
  Our queens, and would not call a child your own,
  If one of them had borne him.

CUCHULAIN.

  I have not said it.

CONCHUBAR.

  Ah! I remember I have heard you boast,
  When the ale was in your blood, that there was one
  In Scotland, where you had learnt the trade of war,
  That had a stone-pale cheek and red-brown hair.
  And that although you had loved other women,
  You’d sooner that fierce woman of the camp
  Bore you a son than any queen among them.

CUCHULAIN.

  You call her a ‘fierce woman of the camp,’
  For having lived among the spinning-wheels,
  You’d have no woman near that would not say,
  ‘Ah! how wise!’ ‘What will you have for supper?’
  ‘What shall I wear that I may please you, sir?’
  And keep that humming through the day and night
  Forever. A fierce woman of the camp!
  But I am getting angry about nothing.
  You have never seen her. Ah! Conchubar, had you seen her
  With that high, laughing, turbulent head of hers
  Thrown backward, and the bow-string at her ear,
  Or sitting at the fire with those grave eyes
  Full of good counsel as it were with wine,
  Or when love ran through all the lineaments
  Of her wild body—although she had no child,
  None other had all beauty, queen, or lover,
  Or was so fitted to give birth to kings.

CONCHUBAR.

  There’s nothing I can say but drifts you farther
  From the one weighty matter. That very woman—
  For I know well that you are praising Aoife—
  Now hates you and will leave no subtilty
  Unknotted that might run into a noose
  About your throat, no army in idleness
  That might bring ruin on this land you serve.

CUCHULAIN.

  No wonder in that, no wonder at all in that.
  I never have known love but as a kiss
  In the mid-battle, and a difficult truce
  Of oil and water, candles and dark night,
  Hillside and hollow, the hot-footed sun,
  And the cold, sliding, slippery-footed moon—
  A brief forgiveness between opposites
  That have been hatreds for three times the age
  Of this long-’stablished ground.

CONCHUBAR.

                                  Listen to me.
  Aoife makes war on us, and every day
  Our enemies grow greater and beat the walls
  More bitterly, and you within the walls
  Are every day more turbulent; and yet,
  When I would speak about these things, your fancy
  Runs as it were a swallow on the wind.

    [_Outside the door in the blue light of the sea mist
    are many old and young KINGS; amongst them are three
    WOMEN, two of whom carry a bowl full of fire. The
    third, in what follows, puts from time to time fragrant
    herbs into the fire so that it flickers up into
    brighter flame._

  Look at the door and what men gather there—
  Old counsellors that steer the land with me,
  And younger kings, the dancers and harp-players
  That follow in your tumults, and all these
  Are held there by the one anxiety.
  Will you be bound into obedience
  And so make this land safe for them and theirs?
  You are but half a king and I but half;
  I need your might of hand and burning heart,
  And you my wisdom.

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Going near to door._]

                      Nestlings of a high nest,
  Hawks that have followed me into the air
  And looked upon the sun, we’ll out of this
  And sail upon the wind once more. This king
  Would have me take an oath to do his will,
  And having listened to his tune from morning,
  I will no more of it. Run to the stable
  And set the horses to the chariot-pole,
  And send a messenger to the harp-players.
  We’ll find a level place among the woods,
  And dance awhile.

A YOUNG KING.

                   Cuchulain, take the oath.
  There is none here that would not have you take it.

CUCHULAIN.

  You’d have me take it? Are you of one mind?

THE KINGS.

  All, all, all, all!

A YOUNG KING.

  Do what the High King bids you.

CONCHUBAR.

  There is not one but dreads this turbulence
  Now that they’re settled men.

CUCHULAIN.

                              Are you so changed,
  Or have I grown more dangerous of late?
  But that’s not it. I understand it all.
  It’s you that have changed. You’ve wives and children now,
  And for that reason cannot follow one
  That lives like a bird’s flight from tree to tree.—
  It’s time the years put water in my blood
  And drowned the wildness of it, for all’s changed,
  But that unchanged.—I’ll take what oath you will:
  The moon, the sun, the water, light, or air,
  I do not care how binding.

CONCHUBAR.

                            On this fire
  That has been lighted from your hearth and mine;
  The older men shall be my witnesses,
  The younger, yours. The holders of the fire
  Shall purify the thresholds of the house
  With waving fire, and shut the outer door,
  According to the custom; and sing rhyme
  That has come down from the old law-makers
  To blow the witches out. Considering
  That the wild will of man could be oath-bound,
  But that a woman’s could not, they bid us sing
  Against the will of woman at its wildest
  In the shape-changers that run upon the wind.

    [_CONCHUBAR has gone on to his throne._]

THE WOMEN.

    [_They sing in a very low voice after the first few
    words so that the others all but drown their words._

  May this fire have driven out
  The shape-changers that can put
  Ruin on a great king’s house
  Until all be ruinous.
  Names whereby a man has known
  The threshold and the hearthstone,
  Gather on the wind and drive
  The women, none can kiss and thrive,
  For they are but whirling wind,
  Out of memory and mind.
  They would make a prince decay
  With light images of clay,
  Planted in the running wave;
  Or, for many shapes they have,
  They would change them into hounds,
  Until he had died of his wounds,
  Though the change were but a whim;
  Or they’d hurl a spell at him,
  That he follow with desire
  Bodies that can never tire,
  Or grow kind, for they anoint
  All their bodies, joint by joint,
  With a miracle-working juice
  That is made out of the grease
  Of the ungoverned unicorn.
  But the man is thrice forlorn,
  Emptied, ruined, wracked, and lost,
  That they follow, for at most
  They will give him kiss for kiss;
  While they murmur, ‘After this
  Hatred may be sweet to the taste.’
  Those wild hands that have embraced
  All his body can but shove
  At the burning wheel of love,
  Till the side of hate comes up.
  Therefore in this ancient cup
  May the sword-blades drink their fill
  Of the homebrew there, until
  They will have for masters none
  But the threshold and hearthstone.

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Speaking, while they are singing._]

  I’ll take and keep this oath, and from this day
  I shall be what you please, my chicks, my nestlings.
  Yet I had thought you were of those that praised
  Whatever life could make the pulse run quickly,
  Even though it were brief, and that you held
  That a free gift was better than a forced.—
  But that’s all over.—I will keep it, too.
  I never gave a gift and took it again.
  If the wild horse should break the chariot-pole,
  It would be punished. Should that be in the oath?

    [_Two of the WOMEN, still singing, crouch in front of
    him holding the bowl over their heads. He spreads his
    hands over the flame._

  I swear to be obedient in all things
  To Conchubar, and to uphold his children.

CONCHUBAR.

  We are one being, as these flames are one:
  I give my wisdom, and I take your strength.
  Now thrust the swords into the flame, and pray
  That they may serve the threshold and the hearthstone
  With faithful service.

    [_The KINGS kneel in a semicircle before the two WOMEN
    and CUCHULAIN, who thrusts his sword into the flame.
    They all put the points of their swords into the flame.
    The third WOMAN is at the back near the big door._

CUCHULAIN.

                        O pure, glittering ones
  That should be more than wife or friend or mistress,
  Give us the enduring will, the unquenchable hope,
  The friendliness of the sword!—

    [_The song grows louder, and the last words ring out
    clearly. There is a loud knocking at the door, and a
    cry of_ ‘Open! open!’

CONCHUBAR.

  Some king that has been loitering on the way.
  Open the door, for I would have all know
  That the oath’s finished and Cuchulain bound,
  And that the swords are drinking up the flame.

    [_The door is opened by the third WOMAN, and a YOUNG
    MAN with a drawn sword enters._

YOUNG MAN.

  I am of Aoife’s army.

    [_The KINGS rush towards him. CUCHULAIN throws himself
    between._

CUCHULAIN.

                       Put up your swords.
  He is but one. Aoife is far away.

YOUNG MAN.

  I have come alone into the midst of you
  To weigh this sword against Cuchulain’s sword.

CONCHUBAR.

  And are you noble? for if of common seed,
  You cannot weigh your sword against his sword
  But in mixed battle.

YOUNG MAN.

                      I am under bonds
  To tell my name to no man; but it’s noble.

CONCHUBAR.

  But I would know your name and not your bonds.
  You cannot speak in the Assembly House,
  If you are not noble.

FIRST OLD KING.

  Answer the High King!

YOUNG MAN.

  I will give no other proof than the hawk gives—
  That it’s no sparrow!

    [_He is silent for a moment, then speaks to all._]

                       Yet look upon me, kings.
  I, too, am of that ancient seed, and carry
  The signs about this body and in these bones.

CUCHULAIN.

  To have shown the hawk’s grey feather is enough,
  And you speak highly, too. Give me that helmet.
  I’d thought they had grown weary sending champions.
  That sword and belt will do. This fighting’s welcome.
  The High King there has promised me his wisdom;
  But the hawk’s sleepy till its well-beloved
  Cries out amid the acorns, or it has seen
  Its enemy like a speck upon the sun.
  What’s wisdom to the hawk, when that clear eye
  Is burning nearer up in the high air?

    [_Looks hard at YOUNG MAN; then comes down steps and
    grasps YOUNG MAN by shoulder._

  Hither into the light.

    [_To_ CONCHUBAR.]

                        The very tint
  Of her that I was speaking of but now.
  Not a pin’s difference.

    [_To_ YOUNG MAN.]

                         You are from the North
  Where there are many that have that tint of hair—
  Red-brown, the light red-brown. Come nearer, boy,
  For I would have another look at you.
  There’s more likeness—a pale, a stone-pale cheek.
  What brought you, boy? Have you no fear of death?

YOUNG MAN.

  Whether I live or die is in the gods’ hands.

CUCHULAIN.

  That is all words, all words; a young man’s talk.
  I am their plough, their harrow, their very strength;
  For he that’s in the sun begot this body
  Upon a mortal woman, and I have heard tell
  It seemed as if he had outrun the moon;
  That he must follow always through waste heaven,
  He loved so happily. He’ll be but slow
  To break a tree that was so sweetly planted.
  Let’s see that arm. I’ll see it if I choose.
  That arm had a good father and a good mother,
  But it is not like this.

YOUNG MAN.

                          You are mocking me;
  You think I am not worthy to be fought.
  But I’ll not wrangle but with this talkative knife.

CUCHULAIN.

  Put up your sword; I am not mocking you.
  I’d have you for my friend, but if it’s not
  Because you have a hot heart and a cold eye,
  I cannot tell the reason.
  [_To CONCHUBAR._] He has got her fierceness,
  And nobody is as fierce as those pale women.
  But I will keep him with me, Conchubar,
  That he may set my memory upon her
  When the day’s fading.—You will stop with us,
  And we will hunt the deer and the wild bulls;
  And, when we have grown weary, light our fires
  Between the wood and water, or on some mountain
  Where the shape-changers of the morning come.
  The High King there would make a mock of me
  Because I did not take a wife among them.
  Why do you hang your head? It’s a good life:
  The head grows prouder in the light of the dawn,
  And friendship thickens in the murmuring dark
  Where the spare hazels meet the wool-white foam.
  But I can see there’s no more need for words
  And that you’ll be my friend from this day out.

CONCHUBAR.

  He has come hither not in his own name
  But in Queen Aoife’s, and has challenged us
  In challenging the foremost man of us all.

CUCHULAIN.

  Well, well, what matter?

CONCHUBAR.

                           You think it does not matter;
  And that a fancy lighter than the air,
  A whim of the moment has more matter in it.
  For having none that shall reign after you,
  You cannot think as I do, who would leave
  A throne too high for insult.

CUCHULAIN.

                                Let your children
  Re-mortar their inheritance, as we have,
  And put more muscle on.—I’ll give you gifts,
  But I’d have something too—that arm-ring, boy.
  We’ll have this quarrel out when you are older.

YOUNG MAN.

  There is no man I’d sooner have my friend
  Than you, whose name has gone about the world
  As if it had been the wind; but Aoife’d say
  I had turned coward.

CUCHULAIN.

                       I will give you gifts
  That Aoife’ll know, and all her people know,
  To have come from me.       [_Showing cloak._
                        My father gave me this.
  He came to try me, rising up at dawn
  Out of the cold dark of the rich sea.
  He challenged me to battle, but before
  My sword had touched his sword, told me his name,
  Gave me this cloak, and vanished. It was woven
  By women of the Country-under-Wave
  Out of the fleeces of the sea. O! tell her
  I was afraid, or tell her what you will.
  No; tell her that I heard a raven croak
  On the north side of the house, and was afraid.

CONCHUBAR.

  Some witch of the air has troubled Cuchulain’s mind.

CUCHULAIN.

  No witchcraft. His head is like a woman’s head
  I had a fancy for.

CONCHUBAR.

                     A witch of the air
  Can make a leaf confound us with memories.
  They run upon the wind and hurl the spells
  That make us nothing, out of the invisible wind.
  They have gone to school to learn the trick of it.

CUCHULAIN.

  No, no—there’s nothing out of common here;
  The winds are innocent.—That arm-ring, boy.

A KING.

  If I’ve your leave I’ll take this challenge up.

ANOTHER KING.

  No, give it me, High King, for this wild Aoife
  Has carried off my slaves.

ANOTHER KING.

                             No, give it me,
  For she has harried me in house and herd.

ANOTHER KING.

  I claim this fight.

OTHER KINGS [_together_].

  And I! And I! And I!

CUCHULAIN.

  Back! back! Put up your swords! Put up your swords!
  There’s none alive that shall accept a challenge
  I have refused. Laegaire, put up your sword!

YOUNG MAN.

  No, let them come. If they’ve a mind for it,
  I’ll try it out with any two together.

CUCHULAIN.

  That’s spoken as I’d have spoken it at your age.
  But you are in my house. Whatever man
  Would fight with you shall fight it out with me.
  They’re dumb, they’re dumb. How many of you would meet
                                            [_Draws sword._
  This mutterer, this old whistler, this sandpiper,
  This edge that’s greyer than the tide, this mouse
  That’s gnawing at the timbers of the world,
  This, this—— Boy, I would meet them all in arms
  If I’d a son like you. He would avenge me
  When I have withstood for the last time the men
  Whose fathers, brothers, sons, and friends I have killed
  Upholding Conchubar, when the four provinces
  Have gathered with the ravens over them.
  But I’d need no avenger. You and I
  Would scatter them like water from a dish.

YOUNG MAN.

  We’ll stand by one another from this out.
  Here is the ring.

CUCHULAIN.

                    No, turn and turn about.
  But my turn’s first because I am the older.

    [_Spreading out cloak._

  Nine queens out of the Country-under-Wave
  Have woven it with the fleeces of the sea
  And they were long embroidering at it.—Boy,
  If I had fought my father, he’d have killed me.
  As certainly as if I had a son
  And fought with him, I should be deadly to him;
  For the old fiery fountains are far off
  And every day there is less heat o’ the blood.

CONCHUBAR.

    [_In a loud voice._]

  No more of this. I will not have this friendship.
  Cuchulain is my man, and I forbid it.
  He shall not go unfought, for I myself—

CUCHULAIN.

  I will not have it.

CONCHUBAR.

  You lay commands on me?

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Seizing CONCHUBAR._]

  You shall not stir, High King. I’ll hold you there.

CONCHUBAR.

  Witchcraft has maddened you.

THE KINGS [_shouting_].

  Yes, witchcraft! witchcraft!

FIRST OLD KING.

  Some witch has worked upon your mind, Cuchulain.
  The head of that young man seemed like a woman’s
  You’d had a fancy for. Then of a sudden
  You laid your hands on the High King himself!

CUCHULAIN.

  And laid my hands on the High King himself?

CONCHUBAR.

  Some witch is floating in the air above us.

CUCHULAIN.

  Yes, witchcraft, witchcraft! Witches of the air!      [_To YOUNG MAN._
  Why did you? Who was it set you to this work?
  Out, out! I say, for now it’s sword on sword!

YOUNG MAN.

  But ... but I did not.

CUCHULAIN.

  Out, I say, out, out!

    [_YOUNG MAN goes out followed by CUCHULAIN. The KINGS
    follow them out with confused cries, and words one can
    hardly hear because of the noise. Some cry, ‘_Quicker,
    quicker!_’ ‘_Why are you so long at the door?_’ ‘_We’ll
    be too late!_’ ‘_Have they begun to fight?_’ and so on;
    and one, it may be, ‘_I saw him fight with Ferdia!_’
    Their voices drown each other. The three women are left
    alone._

FIRST WOMAN.

  I have seen, I have seen!

SECOND WOMAN.

  What do you cry aloud?

FIRST WOMAN.

  The ever-living have shown me what’s to come.

THIRD WOMAN.

  How? Where?

FIRST WOMAN.

  In the ashes of the bowl.

SECOND WOMAN.

  While you were holding it between your hands?

THIRD WOMAN.

  Speak quickly!

FIRST WOMAN.

                 I have seen Cuchulain’s roof-tree
  Leap into fire, and the walls split and blacken.

SECOND WOMAN.

  Cuchulain has gone out to die.

THIRD WOMAN.

  O! O!

SECOND WOMAN.

  Who could have thought that one so great as he
  Should meet his end at this unnoted sword!

FIRST WOMAN.

  Life drifts between a fool and a blind man
  To the end, and nobody can know his end.

SECOND WOMAN.

  Come, look upon the quenching of this greatness.

    [_The other two go to the door, but they stop for a
    moment upon the threshold and wail._

FIRST WOMAN.

  No crying out, for there’ll be need of cries
  And knocking at the breast when it’s all finished.

    [_The WOMEN go out. There is a sound of clashing swords
    from time to time during what follows._

    [_Enter the FOOL dragging the BLIND MAN._

FOOL.

You have eaten it, you have eaten it! You have left me nothing but the
bones.

    [_He throws BLIND MAN down by big chair._

BLIND MAN.

O, that I should have to endure such a plague! O, I ache all over! O,
I am pulled to pieces! This is the way you pay me all the good I have
done you!

FOOL.

You have eaten it! You have told me lies. I might have known you had
eaten it when I saw your slow, sleepy walk. Lie there till the kings
come. O, I will tell Conchubar and Cuchulain and all the kings about
you!

BLIND MAN.

What would have happened to you but for me, and you without your wits?
If I did not take care of you, what would you do for food and warmth?

FOOL.

You take care of me! You stay safe, and send me into every kind of
danger. You sent me down the cliff for gulls’ eggs while you warmed
your blind eyes in the sun; and then you ate all that were good for
food. You left me the eggs that were neither egg nor bird. [_BLIND MAN
tries to rise; FOOL makes him lie down again._] Keep quiet now, till
I shut the door. There is some noise outside—a high vexing noise,
so that I can’t be listening to myself. [_Shuts the big door._] Why
can’t they be quiet! why can’t they be quiet! [_BLIND MAN tries to get
away._] Ah! you would get away, would you! [_Follows BLIND MAN and
brings him back._] Lie there! lie there! No, you won’t get away! Lie
there till the kings come. I’ll tell them all about you. I will tell it
all. How you sit warming yourself, when you have made me light a fire
of sticks, while I sit blowing it with my mouth. Do you not always make
me take the windy side of the bush when it blows, and the rainy side
when it rains?

BLIND MAN.

Oh, good Fool! listen to me. Think of the care I have taken of you. I
have brought you to many a warm hearth, where there was a good welcome
for you, but you would not stay there; you were always wandering about.

FOOL.

The last time you brought me in it was not I who wandered away, but
you that got put out because you took the crubeen out of the pot when
nobody was looking. Keep quiet, now!

CUCHULAIN [_rushing in_].

Witchcraft! There is no witchcraft on the earth, or among the witches
of the air, that these hands cannot break.

FOOL.

Listen to me, Cuchulain. I left him turning the fowl at the fire. He
ate it all, though I had stolen it. He left me nothing but the feathers.

CUCHULAIN.

Fill me a horn of ale!

BLIND MAN.

I gave him what he likes best. You do not know how vain this fool is.
He likes nothing so well as a feather.

FOOL.

He left me nothing but the bones and feathers. Nothing but the
feathers, though I had stolen it.

CUCHULAIN.

Give me that horn! Quarrels here, too! [_Drinks._] What is there
between you two that is worth a quarrel? Out with it!

BLIND MAN.

Where would he be but for me? I must be always thinking—thinking to get
food for the two of us, and when we’ve got it, if the moon is at the
full or the tide on the turn, he’ll leave the rabbit in the snare till
it is full of maggots, or let the trout slip back through his hands
into the stream.

    [_The FOOL has begun singing while the BLIND MAN is
    speaking._

FOOL [_singing_].

  When you were an acorn on the tree-top,
    Then was I an eagle cock;
  Now that you are a withered old block,
    Still am I an eagle cock.

BLIND MAN.

Listen to him, now. That’s the sort of talk I have to put up with day
out, day in.

    [_The FOOL is putting the feathers into his hair.
    CUCHULAIN takes a handful of feathers out of a heap the
    FOOL has on the bench beside him, and out of the FOOL’S
    hair, and begins to wipe the blood from his sword with
    them._

FOOL.

He has taken my feathers to wipe his sword. It is blood that he is
wiping from his sword.

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Goes up to door at back and throws away feathers._]

They are standing about his body. They will not awaken him, for all his
witchcraft.

BLIND MAN.

It is that young champion that he has killed. He that came out of
Aoife’s country.

CUCHULAIN.

He thought to have saved himself with witchcraft.

FOOL.

That blind man there said he would kill you. He came from Aoife’s
country to kill you. That blind man said they had taught him every kind
of weapon that he might do it. But I always knew that you would kill
him.

CUCHULAIN [_to the BLIND MAN_].

You knew him, then?

BLIND MAN.

I saw him, when I had my eyes, in Aoife’s country.

CUCHULAIN.

You were in Aoife’s country?

BLIND MAN.

I knew him and his mother there.

CUCHULAIN.

He was about to speak of her when he died.

BLIND MAN.

He was a queen’s son.

CUCHULAIN.

What queen? what queen? [_Seizes BLIND MAN, who is now sitting upon the
bench._] Was it Scathach? There were many queens. All the rulers there
were queens.

BLIND MAN.

No, not Scathach.

CUCHULAIN.

It was Uathach, then? Speak! speak!

BLIND MAN.

I cannot speak; you are clutching me too tightly. [_CUCHULAIN lets him
go._] I cannot remember who it was. I am not certain. It was some queen.

FOOL.

He said a while ago that the young man was Aoife’s son.

CUCHULAIN.

She? No, no! She had no son when I was there.

FOOL.

That blind man there said that she owned him for her son.

CUCHULAIN.

I had rather he had been some other woman’s son. What father had he? A
soldier out of Alba? She was an amorous woman—a proud, pale, amorous
woman.

BLIND MAN.

None knew whose son he was.

CUCHULAIN.

None knew! Did you know, old listener at doors?

BLIND MAN.

No, no; I knew nothing.

FOOL.

He said awhile ago that he heard Aoife boast that she’d never but the
one lover, and he the only man that had overcome her in battle.

    [_Pause._

BLIND MAN.

Somebody is trembling, Fool! The bench is shaking. Why are you
trembling? Is Cuchulain going to hurt us? It was not I who told you,
Cuchulain.

FOOL.

It is Cuchulain who is trembling. It is Cuchulain who is shaking the
bench.

BLIND MAN.

It is his own son he has slain.

CUCHULAIN.

  ’Twas they that did it, the pale, windy people.
  Where? where? where? My sword against the thunder!
  But no, for they have always been my friends;
  And though they love to blow a smoking coal
  Till it’s all flame, the wars they blow aflame
  Are full of glory, and heart-uplifting pride,
  And not like this. The wars they love awaken
  Old fingers and the sleepy strings of harps.
  Who did it, then? Are you afraid? Speak out!
  For I have put you under my protection,
  And will reward you well. Dubthach the Chafer?
  He’d an old grudge. No, for he is with Maeve.
  Laegaire did it! Why do you not speak?
  What is this house? [_Pause._] Now I remember all.

    [_Comes before CONCHUBAR’S chair, and strikes out with
    his sword, as if CONCHUBAR was sitting upon it._

  ’Twas you who did it—you who sat up there
  With your old rod of kingship, like a magpie
  Nursing a stolen spoon. No, not a magpie,
  A maggot that is eating up the earth!
  Yes, but a magpie, for he’s flown away.
  Where did he fly to?

BLIND MAN.

He is outside the door.

CUCHULAIN.

Outside the door?

BLIND MAN.

Between the door and the sea.

CUCHULAIN.

Conchubar, Conchubar! the sword into your heart!

    [_He rushes out. Pause. FOOL creeps up to the big door
    and looks after him._

FOOL.

He is going up to King Conchubar. They are all about the young man. No,
no, he is standing still. There is a great wave going to break, and
he is looking at it. Ah! now he is running down to the sea, but he is
holding up his sword as if he were going into a fight. [_Pause._] Well
struck! well struck!

BLIND MAN.

What is he doing now?

FOOL.

O! he is fighting the waves!

BLIND MAN.

He sees King Conchubar’s crown on every one of them.

FOOL.

There, he has struck at a big one! He has struck the crown off it; he
has made the foam fly. There again, another big one!

BLIND MAN.

Where are the kings? What are the kings doing?

FOOL.

They are shouting and running down to the shore, and the people are
running out of the houses. They are all running.

BLIND MAN.

You say they are running out of the houses? There will be nobody left
in the houses. Listen, Fool!

FOOL.

There, he is down! He is up again. He is going out into the deep water.
There is a big wave. It has gone over him. I cannot see him now. He has
killed kings and giants, but the waves have mastered him, the waves
have mastered him!

BLIND MAN.

Come here, Fool!

FOOL.

The waves have mastered him.

BLIND MAN.

Come here!

FOOL.

The waves have mastered him.

BLIND MAN.

Come here, I say!

FOOL.

    [_Coming towards him, but looking backward towards the
    door._]

What is it?

BLIND MAN.

There will be nobody in the houses. Come this way; come quickly! The
ovens will be full. We will put our hands into the ovens.

    [_They go out._]
﻿DEIRDRE




  TO ROBERT GREGORY

  WHO INVENTED FOR THIS PLAY BEAUTIFUL COSTUMES
  AND A BEAUTIFUL SCENE


_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_

  MUSICIANS
  FERGUS, _an old man_
  NAISI, _a young king_
  DEIRDRE, _his queen_
  A DARK-FACED MESSENGER
  CONCHUBAR, _the old King of Uladh, who is still strong and vigorous_
  DARK-FACED EXECUTIONER




DEIRDRE

    _A Guest-house in a wood. It is a rough house of
    timber; through the doors and some of the windows one
    can see the great spaces of the wood, the sky dimming,
    night closing in. But a window to the left shows the
    thick leaves of a coppice; the landscape suggests
    silence and loneliness. There is a door to right and
    left, and through the side windows one can see anybody
    who approaches either door, a moment before he enters.
    In the centre, a part of the house is curtained off;
    the curtains are drawn. There are unlighted torches in
    brackets on the walls. There is, at one side, a small
    table with a chessboard and chessmen upon it, and a
    wine flagon and loaf of bread. At the other side of
    the room there is a brazier with a fire; two women,
    with musical instruments beside them, crouch about
    the brazier: they are comely women of about forty.
    Another woman, who carries a stringed instrument,
    enters hurriedly; she speaks, at first standing in the
    doorway._


FIRST MUSICIAN.

  I HAVE a story right, my wanderers,
  That has so mixed with fable in our songs,
  That all seemed fabulous. We are come, by chance,
  Into King Conchubar’s country, and this house
  Is an old guest-house built for travellers
  From the seashore to Conchubar’s royal house,
  And there are certain hills among these woods,
  And there Queen Deirdre grew.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

                                That famous queen
  Who has been wandering with her lover, Naisi,
  And none to friend but lovers and wild hearts?

FIRST MUSICIAN.

    [_Going nearer to the brazier._]

  Some dozen years ago, King Conchubar found
  A house upon a hillside in this wood,
  And there a comely child with an old witch
  To nurse her, and there’s nobody can say
  If she were human, or of those begot
  By an invisible king of the air in a storm
  On a king’s daughter, or anything at all
  Of who she was or why she was hidden there
  But that she’d too much beauty for good luck.
  He went up thither daily, till at last
  She put on womanhood, and he lost peace,
  And Deirdre’s tale began. The King was old.
  A month or so before the marriage day,
  A young man, in the laughing scorn of his youth,
  Naisi, the son of Usnach, climbed up there,
  And having wooed, or, as some say, been wooed,
  Carried her off.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

                   The tale were well enough
  Had it a finish.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                  Hush! I have more to tell;
  But gather close that I may whisper it:
  I speak of terrible, mysterious ends—
  The secrets of a king.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  There’s none to hear!

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  I have been to Conchubar’s house, and followed up
  A crowd of servants going out and in
  With loads upon their heads: embroideries
  To hang upon the walls, or new-mown rushes
  To strew upon the floors, and came at length
  To a great room.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  Be silent; there are steps!

    [_Enter FERGUS, an old man, who moves about from door
    to window excitedly through what follows._

FERGUS.

  You are musicians by these instruments,
  And if as seems—for you are comely women—
  You can praise love, you’ll have the best of luck,
  For there’ll be two, before the night is in,
  That bargained for their love, and paid for it
  All that men value. You have but the time
  To weigh a happy music with the sad;
  To find what is most pleasing to a lover,
  Before the son of Usnach and his queen
  Have passed this threshold.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Deirdre and her man!

FERGUS.

  I thought to find a message from the king,
  And ran to meet it. Is there no messenger
  From Conchubar to Fergus, son of Rogh?
  I was to have found a message in this house.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Are Deirdre and her lover tired of life?

FERGUS.

  You are not of this country, or you’d know
  That they are in my charge, and all forgiven.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  We have no country but the roads of the world.

FERGUS.

  Then you should know that all things change in the world,
  And hatred turns to love and love to hate,
  And even kings forgive.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                          An old man’s love
  Who casts no second line, is hard to cure;
  His jealousy is like his love.

FERGUS.

                                 And that’s but true.
  You have learned something in your wanderings.
  He was so hard to cure, that the whole court,
  But I alone, thought it impossible;
  Yet after I had urged it at all seasons,
  I had my way, and all’s forgiven now;
  And you shall speak the welcome and the joy
  That I lack tongue for.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Yet old men are jealous.

FERGUS [_going to door_].

  I am Conchubar’s near friend, and that weighed somewhat,
  And it was policy to pardon them.
  The need of some young, famous, popular man
  To lead the troops, the murmur of the crowd,
  And his own natural impulse, urged him to it.
  They have been wandering half-a-dozen years.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  And yet old men are jealous.

FERGUS [_coming from door_].

                               Sing the more sweetly
  Because, though age is arid as a bone,
  This man has flowered. I’ve need of music, too;
  If this gray head would suffer no reproach,
  I’d dance and sing—and dance till the hour ran out,
  Because I have accomplished this good deed.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Look there—there at the window, those dark men,
  With murderous and outlandish-looking arms—
  They’ve been about the house all day.

    [_Dark-faced MEN with strange barbaric dress and arms
    pass by the doors and windows. They pass one by one and
    in silence._

FERGUS [_looking after them_].

                                        What are you?
  Where do you come from, who is it sent you here?

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  They will not answer you.

FERGUS.

  They do not hear.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Forgive my open speech, but to these eyes
  That have seen many lands, they are such men
  As kings will gather for a murderous task,
  That neither bribes, commands, nor promises
  Can bring their people to.

FERGUS.

                             And that is why
  You harped upon an old man’s jealousy.
  A trifle sets you quaking. Conchubar’s fame
  Brings merchandise on every wind that blows.
  They may have brought him Libyan dragon-skin,
  Or the ivory of the fierce unicorn.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  If these be merchants, I have seen the goods
  They have brought to Conchubar, and understood
  His murderous purpose.

FERGUS.

                         Murderous, you say?
  Why, what new gossip of the roads is this?
  But I’ll not hear.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                     It may be life or death.
  There is a room in Conchubar’s house, and there—

FERGUS.

  Be silent, or I’ll drive you from the door.
  There’s many a one that would do more than that,
  And make it prison, or death, or banishment
  To slander the High King.

    [_Suddenly restraining himself and speaking gently._

                            He is my friend;
  I have his oath, and I am well content.
  I have known his mind as if it were my own
  These many years, and there is none alive
  Shall buzz against him, and I there to stop it.
  I know myself, and him, and your wild thought
  Fed on extravagant poetry, and lit
  By such a dazzle of old fabulous tales
  That common things are lost, and all that’s strange
  Is true because ’twere pity if it were not.

    [_Going to the door again._

  Quick! quick! your instruments! they are coming now.
  I hear the hoofs a-clatter. Begin that song;
  But what is it to be? I’d have them hear
  A music foaming up out of the house
  Like wine out of a cup. Come now, a verse
  Of some old time not worth remembering,
  And all the lovelier because a bubble.
  Begin, begin, of some old king and queen,
  Of Lugaidh Redstripe or another; no, not him,
  He and his lady perished wretchedly.

FIRST MUSICIAN [_singing_].

  ‘Why is it,’ Queen Edain said,
    ‘If I do but climb the stair....’

FERGUS.

  Ah! that is better.... They are alighted now.
  Shake all your cockscombs, children; these are lovers.

  [_FERGUS goes out._

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  ‘Why is it,’ Queen Edain said,
    ‘If I do but climb the stair
  To the tower overhead,
    When the winds are calling there,
  Or the gannets calling out,
    In waste places of the sky,
  There’s so much to think about,
    That I cry, that I cry?’

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  But her goodman answered her:
    ‘Love would be a thing of naught
  Had not all his limbs a stir
    Born out of immoderate thought;
  Were he anything by half,
    Were his measure running dry.
  Lovers, if they may not laugh,
    Have to cry, have to cry.’

    [_DEIRDRE, NAISI, and FERGUS have been seen for a
    moment through the windows, but now they have entered.
    NAISI lays down shield and spear and helmet, as if
    weary. He goes to the door opposite to the door he
    entered by. He looks out on to the road that leads to
    CONCHUBAR’S house. If he is anxious, he would not have
    FERGUS or DEIRDRE notice it. Presently he comes from
    the door, and goes to the table where the chessboard
    is._

THE THREE MUSICIANS [_together_].

  But is Edain worth a song
    Now the hunt begins anew?
  Praise the beautiful and strong;
    Praise the redness of the yew;
  Praise the blossoming apple-stem.
    But our silence had been wise.
  What is all our praise to them,
    That have one another’s eyes?

FERGUS.

  You are welcome, lady.

DEIRDRE.

                         Conchubar has not come.
  Were the peace honest, he’d have come himself
  To prove it so.

FERGUS.

                  Being no more in love,
  He stays in his own house, arranging where
  The curlew and the plover go, and where
  The speckled heath-cock in a golden dish.

DEIRDRE.

  But there’s no messenger.

FERGUS.

                            He’ll come himself
  When all’s in readiness and night closed in;
  But till that hour, these birds out of the waste
  Shall put his heart and mind into the music.
  There’s many a day that I have almost wept
  To think that one so delicately made
  Might never know the sweet and natural life
  Of women born to that magnificence,
  Quiet and music, courtesy and peace.

DEIRDRE.

  I have found life obscure and violent,
  And think it ever so; but none the less
  I thank you for your kindness, and thank these
  That put it into music.

FERGUS.

                          Your house has been
  The hole of the badger or the den of the fox;
  But all that’s finished, and your days will pass
  From this day out where life is smooth on the tongue,
  Because the grapes were trodden long ago.

NAISI.

  If I was childish, and had faith in omens,
  I’d rather not have lit on that old chessboard
  At my home-coming.

FERGUS.

                     There’s a tale about it—
  It has been lying there these many years—
  Some wild old sorrowful tale.

NAISI.

                                It is the board
  Where Lugaidh Redstripe and that wife of his,
  Who had a seamew’s body half the year,
  Played at the chess upon the night they died.

FERGUS.

  I can remember now a tale of treachery,
  A broken promise and a journey’s end;
  But it were best forgot.

NAISI.

                           If the tale is true,
  When it was plain that they had been betrayed,
  They moved the men, and waited for the end,
  As it were bedtime, and had so quiet minds
  They hardly winked their eyes when the sword flashed.

FERGUS.

  She never could have played so, being a woman,
  If she had not the cold sea’s blood in her.

DEIRDRE.

  I have heard that th’ ever-living warn mankind
  By changing clouds, and casual accidents,
  Or what seem so.

FERGUS.

                   If there had been ill luck
  In lighting on this chessboard of a sudden,
  This flagon that stood on it when we came
  Has made all right again, for it should mean
  All wrongs forgiven, hospitality
  For bitter memory, peace after war,
  While that loaf there should add prosperity.
  Deirdre will see the world, as it were, new-made,
  If she’ll but eat and drink.

NAISI.

                               The flagon’s dry,
  Full of old cobwebs, and the bread is mouldy,
  Left by some traveller gone upon his way
  These many weeks.

DEIRDRE.

                    No one to welcome us,
  And a bare house upon the journey’s end.
  Is that the welcome that a king spreads out
  For those that he would honour?

NAISI.

                                  Hush! no more.
  You are King Conchubar’s guest, being in his house.
  You speak as women do that sit alone,
  Marking the ashes with a stick till they
  Are in a dreamy terror. Being a queen,
  You should have too calm thought to start at shadows.

FERGUS.

  Come, let us look if there’s a messenger
  From Conchubar’s house. A little way without
  One sees the road for half a mile or so,
  Where the trees thin or thicken.

NAISI.

                                   When those we love
  Speak words unfitting to the ear of kings,
  Kind ears are deaf.

FERGUS.

                      Before you came
  I had to threaten these that would have weighed
  Some crazy phantasy of their own brain
  Or gossip of the road with Conchubar’s word.
  If I had thought so little of mankind
  I never could have moved him to this pardon.
  I have believed the best of every man,
  And find that to believe it is enough
  To make a bad man show him at his best,
  Or even a good man swing his lantern higher.

    [_NAISI and FERGUS go out. The last words are spoken as
    they go through the door. One can see them through part
    of what follows, either through door or window. They
    move about, talking or looking along the road towards
    CONCHUBAR’S house._

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  If anything lies heavy on your heart,
  Speak freely of it, knowing it is certain
  That you will never see my face again.

DEIRDRE.

  You’ve been in love?

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                       If you would speak of love,
  Speak freely. There is nothing in the world
  That has been friendly to us but the kisses
  That were upon our lips, and when we are old
  Their memory will be all the life we have.

DEIRDRE.

  There was a man that loved me. He was old;
  I could not love him. Now I can but fear.
  He has made promises, and brought me home;
  But though I turn it over in my thoughts,
  I cannot tell if they are sound and wholesome,
  Or hackles on the hook.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                          I have heard he loved you,
  As some old miser loves the dragon-stone
  He hides among the cobwebs near the roof.

DEIRDRE.

  You mean that when a man who has loved like that
  Is after crossed, love drowns in its own flood,
  And that love drowned and floating is but hate.
  And that a king who hates, sleeps ill at night,
  Till he has killed, and that, though the day laughs,
  We shall be dead at cockcrow.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

                                You have not my thought.
  When I lost one I loved distractedly,
  I blamed my crafty rival and not him,
  And fancied, till my passion had run out,
  That could I carry him away with me,
  And tell him all my love, I’d keep him yet.

DEIRDRE.

  Ah! now I catch your meaning, that this king
  Will murder Naisi, and keep me alive.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  ’Tis you that put that meaning upon words
  Spoken at random.

DEIRDRE.

                     Wanderers like you,
  Who have their wit alone to keep their lives,
  Speak nothing that is bitter to the ear
  At random; if they hint at it at all
  Their eyes and ears have gathered it so lately
  That it is crying out in them for speech.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  We have little that is certain.

DEIRDRE.

                                  Certain or not,
  Speak it out quickly, I beseech you to it;
  I never have met any of your kind,
  But that I gave them money, food, and fire.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  There are strange, miracle-working, wicked stones,
  Men tear out of the heart and the hot brain
  Of Libyan dragons.

DEIRDRE.

                     The hot Istain stone,
  And the cold stone of Fanes, that have power
  To stir even those at enmity to love.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  They have so great an influence, if but sewn
  In the embroideries that curtain in
  The bridal bed.

DEIRDRE.

                  O Mover of the stars
  That made this delicate house of ivory,
  And made my soul its mistress, keep it safe.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  I have seen a bridal bed, so curtained in,
  So decked for miracle in Conchubar’s house,
  And learned that a bride’s coming.

DEIRDRE.

                                     And I the bride?
  Here is worse treachery than the seamew suffered,
  For she but died and mixed into the dust
  Of her dear comrade, but I am to live
  And lie in the one bed with him I hate.
  Where is Naisi? I was not alone like this
  When Conchubar first chose me for his wife;
  I cried in sleeping or waking and he came,
  But now there is worse need.

NAISI [_entering with FERGUS_].

                               Why have you called?
  I was but standing there, without the door.

DEIRDRE [_going to the other door_].

  The horses are still saddled, follow me,
  And hurry to our ships, and get us gone.

NAISI.

    [_Stopping her and partly speaking to her, partly to
    FERGUS._]

  There’s naught to fear; the king’s forgiven all.
  She has the heart of a wild bird that fears
  The net of the fowler or the wicker cage,
  And has been ever so. Although it’s hard,
  It is but needful that I stand against you,
  And if I did not you’d despise me for it,
  As women do the husbands that they lead
  Whether for good or evil.

DEIRDRE.

                            I have heard
  Monstrous, terrible, mysterious things,
  Magical horrors and the spells of wizards.

FERGUS.

  Why, that’s no wonder, you’ve been listening
  To singers of the roads that gather up
  The tales of the whole world, and when they weary
  Imagine new, or lies about the living,
  Because their brains are ever upon fire.

DEIRDRE.

  Is then the king that sends no messenger,
  And leaves an empty house before a guest,
  So clear in all he does that no dim word
  Can light us to a doubt?

FERGUS.

                           However dim,
  Speak it, for I have known King Conchubar
  Better than my own heart, and I can quench
  Whatever words have made you doubt him.

NAISI.

                                          No,
  I cannot weigh the gossip of the roads
  With a king’s word, and were the end but death,
  I may not doubt him.

DEIRDRE.

  Naisi, I must speak.

FERGUS.

  Let us begone, this house is no fit place,
  Being full of doubt—Deirdre is right.

    [_To DEIRDRE, who has gone towards the door she had
    entered by._

                                         No, no,
  Not by that door that opens on the path
  That runs to the seashore, but this that leads
  To Conchubar’s house. We’ll wait no messenger,
  But go to his well-lighted house, and there
  Where the rich world runs up into a wick
  And that burns steadily, because no wind
  Can blow upon it, bring all doubts to an end.
  The table has been spread by this, the court
  Has ridden from all sides to welcome you
  To safety and to peace.

DEIRDRE.

                          Safety and peace!
  I had them when a child, but never since.

FERGUS.

  Men blame you that you have stirred a quarrel up
  That has brought death to many. I have poured
  Water upon the fire, but if you fly
  A second time the house is in a blaze
  And all the screaming household can but blame
  The savage heart of beauty for it all;
  And Naisi that but helped to tar the wisp
  Be but a hunted outlaw all his days.

DEIRDRE.

  I will be blamed no more! there’s but one way.
  I’ll spoil this beauty that brought misery
  And houseless wandering on the man I loved,
  And so buy peace between him and the king.
  These wanderers will show me how to do it,
  To clip my hair to baldness, blacken my skin
  With walnut juice, and tear my face with briars.
  Oh! that wild creatures of the woods had torn
  This body with their claws.

NAISI.

                              What is your meaning?
  What are you saying? That he loves you still?

DEIRDRE.

  Whatever were to happen to this face,
  I’d be myself; and there’s not any way
  But this way to bring trouble to an end.

NAISI.

  Answer me—does King Conchubar still love—
  Does he still covet you?

DEIRDRE.

                           Tell out the plot,
  The plan, the network, all the treachery,
  And of the bridal chamber and the bed,
  The magical stones, the wizard’s handiwork.

NAISI.

  Take care of Deirdre, if I die in this,
  For she must never fall into his hands,
  Whatever the cost.

DEIRDRE.

  Where would you go to, Naisi?

NAISI.

  I go to drag the truth from Conchubar,
  Before his people, in the face of his army,
  And if it be as black as you have made it,
  To kill him there.

DEIRDRE.

                     You never would return;
  I’d never look upon your face again.
  Oh, keep him, Fergus; do not let him go,
  But hold him from it. You are both wise and kind.

NAISI.

  When you were all but Conchubar’s wife, I took you;
  He tried to kill me, and he would have done it
  If I had been so near as I am now.
  And now that you are mine, he has planned to take you.
  Should I be less than Conchubar, being a man?

    [_Dark-faced MESSENGER comes into the house, unnoticed._

MESSENGER.

  Supper is on the table; Conchubar
  Is waiting for his guests.

FERGUS.

                             All’s well, again!
  All’s well! all’s well! You cried your doubts so loud,
  That I had almost doubted.

NAISI.

                             I would have killed him,
  And he the while but busy in his house
  For the more welcome.

DEIRDRE.

  The message is not finished.

FERGUS.

  Come quickly. Conchubar will laugh, that I—
  Although I held out boldly in my speech—
  That I, even I—

DEIRDRE.

  Wait, wait! He is not done.

FERGUS.

  That am so great a friend, have doubted him.

MESSENGER.

  Deirdre, and Fergus, son of Rogh, are summoned;
  But not the traitor that bore off the queen.
  It is enough that the king pardon her,
  And call her to his table and his bed.

NAISI.

  So, then, it’s treachery.

FERGUS.

  I’ll not believe it.

NAISI.

  Tell Conchubar to meet me in some place
  Where none can come between us but our swords.

MESSENGER.

  I have done my message; I am Conchubar’s man;
  I take no message from a traitor’s lips.

    [_He goes._

NAISI.

  No, but you must; and I will have you swear
  To carry it unbroken.

    [_He follows MESSENGER out._

FERGUS.

                        He has been suborned.
  I know King Conchubar’s mind as it were my own;
  I’ll learn the truth from him.

    [_He is about to follow NAISI, but DEIRDRE stops him._

DEIRDRE.

                                 No, no, old man,
  You thought the best, and the worst came of it;
  We listened to the counsel of the wise,
  And so turned fools. But ride and bring your friends.
  Go, and go quickly. Conchubar has not seen me;
  It may be that his passion is asleep,
  And that we may escape.

FERGUS.

                          But I’ll go first,
  And follow up that Libyan heel, and send
  Such words to Conchubar, that he may know
  At how great peril he lays hands upon you.

    [_NAISI enters._]

NAISI.

  The Libyan, knowing that a servant’s life
  Is safe from hands like mine, but turned and mocked.

FERGUS.

  I’ll call my friends, and call the reaping-hooks,
  And carry you in safety to the ships.
  My name has still some power. I will protect,
  Or, if that is impossible, revenge.

    [_Goes out by other door._

NAISI.

    [_Who is calm, like a man who has passed beyond life._]

  The crib has fallen and the birds are in it;
  There is not one of the great oaks about us
  But shades a hundred men.

DEIRDRE.

                            Let’s out and die,
  Or break away, if the chance favour us.

NAISI.

  They would but drag you from me, stained with blood.
  Their barbarous weapons would but mar that beauty,
  And I would have you die as a queen should—
  In a death chamber. You are in my charge.
  We will wait here, and when they come upon us,
  I’ll hold them from the doors, and when that’s over,
  Give you a cleanly death with this grey edge.

DEIRDRE.

  I will stay here; but you go out and fight.
  Our way of life has brought no friends to us,
  And if we do not buy them leaving it,
  We shall be ever friendless.

NAISI.

                               What do they say?
  That Lugaidh Redstripe and that wife of his
  Sat at this chessboard, waiting for their end.
  They knew that there was nothing that could save them,
  And so played chess as they had any night
  For years, and waited for the stroke of sword.
  I never heard a death so out of reach
  Of common hearts, a high and comely end:
  What need have I, that gave up all for love,
  To die like an old king out of a fable,
  Fighting and passionate? What need is there
  For all that ostentation at my setting?
  I have loved truly and betrayed no man.
  I need no lightning at the end, no beating
  In a vain fury at the cage’s door.

    [_To MUSICIANS._]

  Had you been here when that man and his queen
  Played at so high a game, could you have found
  An ancient poem for the praise of it?
  It should have set out plainly that those two,
  Because no man and woman have loved better,
  Might sit on there contentedly, and weigh
  The joy comes after. I have heard the seamew
  Sat there, with all the colour in her cheeks,
  As though she’d say: ‘There’s nothing happening
  But that a king and queen are playing chess.’

DEIRDRE.

  He’s in the right, though I have not been born
  Of the cold, haughty waves. My veins are hot.
  But though I have loved better than that queen,
  I’ll have as quiet fingers on the board.
  Oh, singing women, set it down in a book
  That love is all we need, even though it is
  But the last drops we gather up like this;
  And though the drops are all we have known of life,
  For we have been most friendless—praise us for it
  And praise the double sunset, for naught’s lacking,
  But a good end to the long, cloudy day.

NAISI.

  Light torches there and drive the shadows out,
  For day’s red end comes up.

    [_A MUSICIAN lights a torch in the fire and then
    crosses before the chess-players, and slowly lights the
    torches in the sconces. The light is almost gone from
    the wood, but there is a clear evening light in the
    sky, increasing the sense of solitude and loneliness._

DEIRDRE.

                              Make no sad music.
  What is it but a king and queen at chess?
  They need a music that can mix itself
  Into imagination, but not break
  The steady thinking that the hard game needs.

    [_During the chess, the MUSICIANS sing this song._]

  Love is an immoderate thing
    And can never be content,
  Till it dip an ageing wing,
    Where some laughing element
  Leaps and Time’s old lanthorn dims.
    What’s the merit in love-play,
  In the tumult of the limbs
    That dies out before ’tis day,
  Heart on heart, or mouth on mouth,
    All that mingling of our breath,
  When love-longing is but drouth
    For the things come after death?

    [_During the last verses DEIRDRE rises from the board
    and kneels at NAISI’S feet._]

DEIRDRE.

  I cannot go on playing like that woman
  That had but the cold blood of the sea in her veins.

NAISI.

  It is your move. Take up your man again.

DEIRDRE.

  Do you remember that first night in the woods
  We lay all night on leaves, and looking up,
  When the first grey of the dawn awoke the birds,
  Saw leaves above us. You thought that I still slept,
  And bending down to kiss me on the eyes,
  Found they were open. Bend and kiss me now,
  For it may be the last before our death.
  And when that’s over, we’ll be different;
  Imperishable things, a cloud or a fire.
  And I know nothing but this body, nothing
  But that old vehement, bewildering kiss.

    [_CONCHUBAR comes to the door._]

MUSICIAN.

  Children, beware!

NAISI [_laughing_].

                    He has taken up my challenge;
  Whether I am a ghost or living man
  When day has broken, I’ll forget the rest,
  And say that there is kingly stuff in him.

    [_Turns to fetch spear and shield, and then sees that
    CONCHUBAR has gone._

DEIRDRE.

  He came to spy upon us, not to fight.

NAISI.

  A prudent hunter, therefore, but no king.
  He’d find if what has fallen in the pit
  Were worth the hunting, but has come too near,
  And I turn hunter. You’re not man, but beast.
  Go scurry in the bushes, now, beast, beast,
  For now it’s topsy-turvy, I upon you.

    [_He rushes out after CONCHUBAR._

DEIRDRE.

  You have a knife there thrust into your girdle.
  I’d have you give it me.

MUSICIAN.

  No, but I dare not.

DEIRDRE.

  No, but you must.

MUSICIAN.

                    If harm should come to you,
  They’d know I gave it.

DEIRDRE [_snatching knife_].

                         There is no mark on this
  To make it different from any other
  Out of a common forge.

    [_Goes to the door and looks out._

MUSICIAN.

                          You have taken it,
  I did not give it you; but there are times
  When such a thing is all the friend one has.

DEIRDRE.

  The leaves hide all, and there’s no way to find
  What path to follow. Why is there no sound?

    [_She goes from door to window._

MUSICIAN.

  Where would you go?

DEIRDRE.

                      To strike a blow for Naisi,
  If Conchubar call the Libyans to his aid.
  But why is there no clash? They have met by this!

MUSICIAN.

  Listen. I am called far-seeing. If Conchubar win,
  You have a woman’s wile that can do much,
  Even with men in pride of victory.
  He is in love and old. What were one knife
  Among a hundred?

DEIRDRE [_going towards them_].

                   Women, if I die,
  If Naisi die this night, how will you praise?
  What words seek out? for that will stand to you;
  For being but dead we shall have many friends.
  All through your wanderings, the doors of kings
  Shall be thrown wider open, the poor man’s hearth
  Heaped with new turf, because you are wearing this
                            [_Gives MUSICIAN a bracelet._
  To show that you have Deirdre’s story right.

MUSICIAN.

  Have you not been paid servants in love’s house
  To sweep the ashes out and keep the doors?
  And though you have suffered all for mere love’s sake
  You’d live your lives again.

DEIRDRE.

  Even this last hour.

    [_CONCHUBAR enters with dark-faced men._]

CONCHUBAR.

  One woman and two men; that is a quarrel
  That knows no mending. Bring the man she chose
  Because of his beauty and the strength of his youth.

    [_The dark-faced men drag in NAISI entangled in a net._

NAISI.

  I have been taken like a bird or a fish.

CONCHUBAR.

  He cried ‘Beast, beast!’ and in a blind-beast rage
  He ran at me and fell into the nets,
  But we were careful for your sake, and took him
  With all the comeliness that woke desire
  Unbroken in him. I being old and lenient—
  I would not hurt a hair upon his head.

DEIRDRE.

  What do you say? Have you forgiven him?

NAISI.

  He is but mocking us. What’s left to say
  Now that the seven years’ hunt is at an end?

DEIRDRE.

  He never doubted you until I made him,
  And therefore all the blame for what he says
  Should fall on me.

CONCHUBAR.

                     But his young blood is hot,
  And if we’re of one mind, he shall go free,
  And I ask nothing for it, or, if something,
  Nothing I could not take. There is no king
  In the wide world that, being so greatly wronged,
  Could copy me, and give all vengeance up.
  Although her marriage-day had all but come,
  You carried her away; but I’ll show mercy.
  Because you had the insolent strength of youth
  You carried her away; but I’ve had time
  To think it out through all these seven years.
  I will show mercy.

NAISI.

  You have many words.

CONCHUBAR.

  I will not make a bargain; I but ask
  What is already mine. You may go free
  If Deirdre will but walk into my house
  Before the people’s eyes, that they may know
  When I have put the crown upon her head
  I have not taken her by force and guile.
  The doors are open, and the floors are strewed,
  And in the bridal chamber curtains sewn
  With all enchantments that give happiness,
  By races that are germane to the sun,
  And nearest him, and have no blood in their veins—
  For when they’re wounded the wound drips with wine—
  Nor speech but singing. At the bridal door
  Two fair king’s daughters carry in their hands
  The crown and robe.

DEIRDRE.

                      Oh, no! Not that, not that.
  Ask any other thing but that one thing.
  Leave me with Naisi. We will go away
  Into some country at the ends of the earth.
  We’ll trouble you no more. You will be praised
  By everybody if you pardon us.
  ‘He is good, he is good,’ they’ll say to one another;
  ‘There’s nobody like him, for he forgave
  Deirdre and Naisi.’

CONCHUBAR.

                      Do you think that I
  Shall let you go again, after seven years
  Of longing and of planning here and there,
  And trafficking with merchants for the stones
  That make all sure, and watching my own face
  That none might read it?

DEIRDRE [_to NAISI_].

                           It’s better to go with him.
  Why should you die when one can bear it all?
  My life is over; it’s better to obey.
  Why should you die? I will not live long, Naisi.
  I’d not have you believe I’d long stay living;
  Oh no, no, no! You will go far away.
  You will forget me. Speak, speak, Naisi, speak,
  And say that it is better that I go.
  I will not ask it. Do not speak a word,
  For I will take it all upon myself.
  Conchubar, I will go.

NAISI.

                        And do you think
  That, were I given life at such a price,
  I would not cast it from me? O, my eagle!
  Why do you beat vain wings upon the rock
  When hollow night’s above?

DEIRDRE.

                             It’s better, Naisi.
  It may be hard for you, but you’ll forget.
  For what am I, to be remembered always?
  And there are other women. There was one,
  The daughter of the King of Leodas;
  I could not sleep because of her. Speak to him;
  Tell it out plain, and make him understand.
  And if it be he thinks I shall stay living,
  Say that I will not.

NAISI.

                       Would I had lost life
  Among those Scottish kings that sought it of me,
  Because you were my wife, or that the worst
  Had taken you before this bargaining!
  O eagle! if you were to do this thing,
  And buy my life of Conchubar with your body,
  Love’s law being broken, I would stand alone
  Upon the eternal summits, and call out,
  And you could never come there, being banished.

DEIRDRE [_kneeling to CONCHUBAR_].

  I would obey, but cannot. Pardon us.
  I know that you are good. I have heard you praised
  For giving gifts; and you will pardon us,
  Although I cannot go into your house.
  It was my fault. I only should be punished.

    [_Unseen by DEIRDRE, NAISI is gagged._

  The very moment these eyes fell on him,
  I told him; I held out my hands to him;
  How could he refuse? At first he would not—
  I am not lying—he remembered you.
  What do I say? My hands?—No, no, my lips—
  For I had pressed my lips upon his lips—
  I swear it is not false—my breast to his;

    [_CONCHUBAR motions; NAISI, unseen by DEIRDRE, is taken
    behind the curtain._

  Until I woke the passion that’s in all,
  And how could he resist? I had my beauty.
  You may have need of him, a brave, strong man,
  Who is not foolish at the council board,
  Nor does he quarrel by the candle-light
  And give hard blows to dogs. A cup of wine
  Moves him to mirth, not madness.

    [_She stands up._

                                   What am I saying?
  You may have need of him, for you have none
  Who is so good a sword, or so well loved
  Among the common people. You may need him,
  And what king knows when the hour of need may come?
  You dream that you have men enough. You laugh.
  Yes; you are laughing to yourself. You say,
  ‘I am Conchubar—I have no need of him.’
  You will cry out for him some day and say,
  ‘If Naisi were but living’——[_She misses NAISI._] Where is he?
  Where have you sent him? Where is the son of Usna?
  Where is he, O, where is he?

    [_She staggers over to the MUSICIANS. The EXECUTIONER
    has come out with sword on which there is blood;
    CONCHUBAR points to it. The MUSICIANS give a wail._

CONCHUBAR.

  The traitor who has carried off my wife
  No longer lives. Come to my house now, Deirdre,
  For he that called himself your husband’s dead.

DEIRDRE.

  O, do not touch me. Let me go to him.

    [_Pause._

  King Conchubar is right. My husband’s dead.
  A single woman is of no account,
  Lacking array of servants, linen cupboards,
  The bacon hanging—and King Conchubar’s house
  All ready, too—I’ll to King Conchubar’s house.
  It is but wisdom to do willingly
  What has to be.

CONCHUBAR.

                  But why are you so calm?
  I thought that you would curse me and cry out,
  And fall upon the ground and tear your hair.

DEIRDRE [_laughing_].

  You know too much of women to think so;
  Though, if I were less worthy of desire,
  I would pretend as much; but, being myself,
  It is enough that you were master here.
  Although we are so delicately made,
  There’s something brutal in us, and we are won
  By those who can shed blood. It was some woman
  That taught you how to woo: but do not touch me,
  For I’ll go with you and do all your will
  When I have done whatever’s customary.
  We lay the dead out, folding up the hands,
  Closing the eyes, and stretching out the feet,
  And push a pillow underneath the head,
  Till all’s in order; and all this I’ll do
  For Naisi, son of Usna.

CONCHUBAR.

                          It is not fitting.
  You are not now a wanderer, but a queen,
  And there are plenty that can do these things.

DEIRDRE.

    [_Motioning CONCHUBAR away._]

  No, no. Not yet. I cannot be your queen
  Till the past’s finished, and its debts are paid.
  When a man dies and there are debts unpaid,
  He wanders by the debtor’s bed and cries,
  There’s so much owing.

CONCHUBAR.

                         You are deceiving me.
  You long to look upon his face again.
  Why should I give you now to a dead man
  That took you from a living?

    [_He makes a step towards her._

DEIRDRE.

                               In good time.
  You’ll stir me to more passion than he could,
  And yet, if you are wise, you’ll grant me this:
  That I go look upon him that was once
  So strong and comely and held his head so high
  That women envied me. For I will see him
  All blood-bedabbled and his beauty gone.
  It’s better, when you’re beside me in your strength,
  That the mind’s eye should call up the soiled body,
  And not the shape I loved. Look at him, women.
  He heard me pleading to be given up,
  Although my lover was still living, and yet
  He doubts my purpose. I will have you tell him
  How changeable all women are. How soon
  Even the best of lovers is forgot,
  When his day’s finished.

CONCHUBAR.

                           No; but I will trust
  The strength you have spoken of, and not your purpose.

DEIRDRE [_almost with a caress_].

  I’ll have this gift—the first that I have asked.
  He has refused. There is no sap in him,
  Nothing but empty veins. I thought as much.
  He has refused me the first thing I have asked—
  Me, me, his wife. I understand him now;
  I know the sort of life I’ll have with him;
  But he must drag me to his house by force.
  If he refuse [_she laughs_], he shall be mocked of all.
  They’ll say to one another, ‘Look at him
  That is so jealous that he lured a man
  From over sea, and murdered him, and yet
  He trembled at the thought of a dead face!’

    [_She has her hand upon curtain._

CONCHUBAR.

  How do I know that you have not some knife,
  And go to die upon his body?

DEIRDRE.

                               Have me searched,
  If you would make so little of your queen.
  It may be that I have a knife hid here
  Under my dress. Bid one of these dark slaves
  To search me for it.

    [_Pause._

CONCHUBAR.

  Go to your farewells, queen.

DEIRDRE.

  Now strike the wire, and sing to it awhile,
  Knowing that all is happy, and that you know
  Within what bride-bed I shall lie this night,
  And by what man, and lie close up to him,
  For the bed’s narrow, and there outsleep the cockcrow.
                              [_She goes behind the curtain._

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  They are gone, they are gone. The proud may lie by the proud.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  Though we were bidden to sing, cry nothing loud.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  They are gone, they are gone.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  Whispering were enough.

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Into the secret wilderness of their love.

SECOND MUSICIAN.

  A high, grey cairn. What more is to be said?

FIRST MUSICIAN.

  Eagles have gone into their cloudy bed.

    [_Shouting outside. FERGUS enters. Many men with
    scythes and sickles and torches gather about the doors.
    The house is lit with the glare of their torches._

FERGUS.

  Where’s Naisi, son of Usna, and his queen?
  I and a thousand reaping-hooks and scythes
  Demand him of you.

CONCHUBAR.

                     You have come too late.
  I have accomplished all. Deirdre is mine;
  She is my queen, and no man now can rob me.
  I had to climb the topmost bough and pull
  This apple among the winds. Open the curtain,
  That Fergus learn my triumph from her lips.

    [_The curtain is drawn back. The MUSICIANS begin to
    keen with low voices._

  No, no; I’ll not believe it. She is not dead—
  She cannot have escaped a second time!

FERGUS.

  King, she is dead; but lay no hand upon her.
  What’s this but empty cage and tangled wire,
  Now the bird’s gone? but I’ll not have you touch it.

CONCHUBAR.

  You are all traitors, all against me—all.
  And she has deceived me for a second time.
  And every common man may keep his wife,
  But not the King.

    [_Loud shouting outside_: ‘Death to Conchubar!’ ‘Where
    is Naisi?’ etc. _The dark-skinned men gather round
    CONCHUBAR and draw their swords; but he motions them
    away._

                    I have no need of weapons,
  There’s not a traitor that dare stop my way.
  Howl, if you will; but I, being king, did right
  In choosing her most fitting to be queen,
  And letting no boy lover take the sway.
﻿THE SHADOWY WATERS




TO LADY GREGORY


  _I walked among the seven woods of Coole,
  Shan-walla, where a willow-bordered pond
  Gathers the wild duck from the winter dawn;
  Shady Kyle-dortha; sunnier Kyle-na-gno,
  Where many hundred squirrels are as happy
  As though they had been hidden by green boughs,
  Where old age cannot find them; Pairc-na-lea,
  Where hazel and ash and privet blind the paths;
  Dim Pairc-na-carraig, where the wild bees fling
  Their sudden fragrances on the green air;
  Dim Pairc-na-tarav, where enchanted eyes
  Have seen immortal, mild, proud shadows walk;
  Dim Inchy wood, that hides badger and fox
  And marten-cat, and borders that old wood
  Wise Biddy Early called the wicked wood:
  Seven odours, seven murmurs, seven woods.
  I had not eyes like those enchanted eyes,
  Yet dreamed that beings happier than men
  Moved round me in the shadows, and at night
  My dreams were cloven by voices and by fires;
  And the images I have woven in this story
  Of Forgael and Dectora and the empty waters
  Moved round me in the voices and the fires,
  And more I may not write of, for they that cleave
  The waters of sleep can make a chattering tongue
  Heavy like stone, their wisdom being half silence.
  How shall I name you, immortal, mild, proud shadows?
  I only know that all we know comes from you,
  And that you come from Eden on flying feet.
  Is Eden far away, or do you hide
  From human thought, as hares and mice and coneys
  That run before the reaping-hook and lie
  In the last ridge of the barley? Do our woods
  And winds and ponds cover more quiet woods,
  More shining winds, more star-glimmering ponds?
  Is Eden out of time and out of space?
  And do you gather about us when pale light
  Shining on water and fallen among leaves,
  And winds blowing from flowers, and whirr of feathers
  And the green quiet, have uplifted the heart?_

  _I have made this poem for you, that men may read it
  Before they read of Forgael and Dectora,
  As men in the old times, before the harps began,
  Poured out wine for the high invisible ones._

  SEPTEMBER, 1900.




THE HARP OF AENGUS

  _Edain came out of Midher’s hill, and lay
  Beside young Aengus in his tower of glass,
  Where time is drowned in odour-laden winds
  And druid moons, and murmuring of boughs,
  And sleepy boughs, and boughs where apples made
  Of opal and ruby and pale chrysolite
  Awake unsleeping fires; and wove seven strings,
  Sweet with all music, out of his long hair,
  Because her hands had been made wild by love;
  When Midher’s wife had changed her to a fly,
  He made a harp with druid apple wood
  That she among her winds might know he wept;
  And from that hour he has watched over none
  But faithful lovers._


_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_

  FORGAEL
  AIBRIC
  SAILORS
  DECTORA

    _The deck of an ancient ship. At the right of the stage
    is the mast, with a large square sail hiding a great
    deal of the sky and sea on that side. The tiller is at
    the left of the stage; it is a long oar coming through
    an opening in the bulwark. The deck rises in a series
    of steps behind the tiller, and the stern of the ship
    curves overhead. All the woodwork is of dark green;
    and the sail is dark green, with a blue pattern upon
    it, having a little copper colour here and there. The
    sky and sea are dark blue. All the persons of the play
    are dressed in various tints of green and blue, the
    men with helmets and swords of copper, the woman with
    copper ornaments upon her dress. When the play opens
    there are four persons upon the deck. AIBRIC stands by
    the tiller. FORGAEL sleeps upon the raised portion of
    the deck towards the front of the stage. Two SAILORS
    are standing near to the mast, on which a harp is
    hanging._


FIRST SAILOR.

  Has he not led us into these waste seas
  For long enough?

SECOND SAILOR.

  Aye, long and long enough.

FIRST SAILOR.

  We have not come upon a shore or ship
  These dozen weeks.

SECOND SAILOR.

                     And I had thought to make
  A good round sum upon this cruise, and turn—
  For I am getting on in life—to something
  That has less ups and downs than robbery.

FIRST SAILOR.

  I am so lecherous with abstinence
  I’d give the profit of nine voyages
  For that red Moll that had but the one eye.

SECOND SAILOR.

  And all the ale ran out at the new moon;
  And now that time puts water in my blood,
  The ale cup is my father and my mother.

FIRST SAILOR.

  It would be better to turn home again,
  Whether he will or no; and better still
  To make an end while he is sleeping there.
  If we were of one mind I’d do it.

SECOND SAILOR.

                                    Were’t not
  That there is magic in that harp of his,
  That makes me fear to raise a hand against him,
  I would be of your mind; but when he plays it
  Strange creatures flutter up before one’s eyes,
  Or cry about one’s ears.

FIRST SAILOR.

  Nothing to fear.

SECOND SAILOR.

  Do you remember when we sank that galley
  At the full moon?

FIRST SAILOR.

  He played all through the night.

SECOND SAILOR.

  Until the moon had set; and when I looked
  Where the dead drifted, I could see a bird
  Like a grey gull upon the breast of each.
  While I was looking they rose hurriedly,
  And after circling with strange cries awhile
  Flew westward; and many a time since then
  I’ve heard a rustling overhead in the wind.

FIRST SAILOR.

  I saw them on that night as well as you.
  But when I had eaten and drunk a bellyful
  My courage came again.

SECOND SAILOR.

                         But that’s not all.
  The other night, while he was playing it,
  A beautiful young man and girl came up
  In a white, breaking wave; they had the look
  Of those that are alive for ever and ever.

FIRST SAILOR.

  I saw them, too, one night. Forgael was playing,
  And they were listening there beyond the sail.
  He could not see them, but I held out my hands
  To grasp the woman.

SECOND SAILOR.

  You have dared to touch her?

FIRST SAILOR.

  O, she was but a shadow, and slipped from me.

SECOND SAILOR.

  But were you not afraid?

FIRST SAILOR.

  Why should I fear?

SECOND SAILOR.

  ’Twas Aengus and Edain, the wandering lovers,
  To whom all lovers pray.

FIRST SAILOR.

                           But what of that?
  A shadow does not carry sword or spear.

SECOND SAILOR.

  My mother told me that there is not one
  Of the ever-living half so dangerous
  As that wild Aengus. Long before her day
  He carried Edain off from a king’s house,
  And hid her among fruits of jewel-stone
  And in a tower of glass, and from that day
  Has hated every man that’s not in love,
  And has been dangerous to him.

FIRST SAILOR.

                                 I have heard
  He does not hate seafarers as he hates
  Peaceable men that shut the wind away,
  And keep to the one weary marriage-bed.

SECOND SAILOR.

  I think that he has Forgael in his net,
  And drags him through the sea.

FIRST SAILOR.

                                Well, net or none,
  I’d kill him while we have the chance to do it.

SECOND SAILOR.

  It’s certain I’d sleep easier o’ nights
  If he were dead; but who will be our captain,
  Judge of the stars, and find a course for us?

FIRST SAILOR.

  I’ve thought of that. We must have Aibric with us,
  For he can judge the stars as well as Forgael.

    [_Going towards AIBRIC._

  Become our captain, Aibric. I am resolved
  To make an end of Forgael while he sleeps.
  There’s not a man but will be glad of it
  When it is over, nor one to grumble at us.
  You’ll have the captain’s share of everything.

AIBRIC.

  Silence! for you have taken Forgael’s pay.

FIRST SAILOR.

  We joined him for his pay, but have had none
  This long while now; we had not turned against him
  If he had brought us among peopled seas,
  For that was in the bargain when we struck it.
  What good is there in this hard way of living,
  Unless we drain more flagons in a year
  And kiss more lips than lasting peaceable men
  In their long lives? If you’ll be of our troop
  You’ll be as good a leader.

AIBRIC.

                              Be of your troop!
  No, nor with a hundred men like you,
  When Forgael’s in the other scale. I’d say it
  Even if Forgael had not been my master
  From earliest childhood, but that being so,
  If you will draw that sword out of its scabbard
  I’ll give my answer.

FIRST SAILOR.

  You have awaked him.

    [_To SECOND SAILOR._

  We’d better go, for we have lost this chance.

    [_They go out._

FORGAEL.

  Have the birds passed us? I could hear your voice.
  But there were others.

AIBRIC.

  I have seen nothing pass.

FORGAEL.

  You’re certain of it? I never wake from sleep
  But that I am afraid they may have passed,
  For they’re my only pilots. If I lost them
  Straying too far into the north or south,
  I’d never come upon the happiness
  That has been promised me. I have not seen them
  These many days; and yet there must be many
  Dying at every moment in the world,
  And flying towards their peace.

AIBRIC.

                                  Put by these thoughts,
  And listen to me for awhile. The sailors
  Are plotting for your death.

FORGAEL.

                               Have I not given
  More riches than they ever hoped to find?
  And now they will not follow, while I seek
  The only riches that have hit my fancy.

AIBRIC.

  What riches can you find in this waste sea
  Where no ship sails, where nothing that’s alive
  Has ever come but those man-headed birds,
  Knowing it for the world’s end?

FORGAEL.

                                  Where the world ends
  The mind is made unchanging, for it finds
  Miracle, ecstasy, the impossible hope,
  The flagstone under all, the fire of fires,
  The roots of the world.

AIBRIC.

                          Who knows that shadows
  May not have driven you mad for their own sport?

FORGAEL.

  Do you, too, doubt me? Have you joined their plot?

AIBRIC.

  No, no, do not say that. You know right well
  That I will never lift a hand against you.

FORGAEL.

  Why should you be more faithful than the rest,
  Being as doubtful?

AIBRIC.

                     I have called you master
  Too many years to lift a hand against you.

FORGAEL.

  Maybe it is but natural to doubt me.
  You’ve never known, I’d lay a wager on it,
  A melancholy that a cup of wine,
  A lucky battle, or a woman’s kiss
  Could not amend.

AIBRIC.

                   I have good spirits enough.
  I’ve nothing to complain of but heartburn,
  And that is cured by a boiled liquorice root.

FORGAEL.

  If you will give me all your mind awhile—
  All, all, the very bottom of the bowl—
  I’ll show you that I am made differently,
  That nothing can amend it but these waters,
  Where I am rid of life—the events of the world—
  What do you call it?—that old promise-breaker,
  The cozening fortune-teller that comes whispering,
  ‘You will have all you have wished for when you have earned
  Land for your children or money in a pot.’
  And when we have it we are no happier,
  Because of that old draught under the door,
  Or creaky shoes. And at the end of all
  We have been no better off than Seaghan the fool,
  That never did a hand’s turn. Aibric! Aibric!
  We have fallen in the dreams the ever-living
  Breathe on the burnished mirror of the world,
  And then smooth out with ivory hands and sigh,
  And find their laughter sweeter to the taste
  For that brief sighing.

AIBRIC.

  If you had loved some woman—

FORGAEL.

  You say that also? You have heard the voices,
  For that is what they say—all, all the shadows—
  Aengus and Edain, those passionate wanderers,
  And all the others; but it must be love
  As they have known it. Now the secret’s out;
  For it is love that I am seeking for,
  But of a beautiful, unheard-of kind
  That is not in the world.

AIBRIC.

                             And yet the world
  Has beautiful women to please every man.

FORGAEL.

  But he that gets their love after the fashion
  Loves in brief longing and deceiving hope
  And bodily tenderness, and finds that even
  The bed of love, that in the imagination
  Had seemed to be the giver of all peace,
  Is no more than a wine-cup in the tasting,
  And as soon finished.

AIBRIC.

                        All that ever loved
  Have loved that way—there is no other way.

FORGAEL.

  Yet never have two lovers kissed but they
  Believed there was some other near at hand,
  And almost wept because they could not find it.

AIBRIC.

  When they have twenty years; in middle life
  They take a kiss for what a kiss is worth,
  And let the dream go by.

FORGAEL.

                           It’s not a dream,
  But the reality that makes our passion
  As a lamp shadow—no—no lamp, the sun.
  What the world’s million lips are thirsting for,
  Must be substantial somewhere.

AIBRIC.

                                 I have heard the Druids
  Mutter such things as they awake from trance.
  It may be that the ever-living know it—
  No mortal can.

FORGAEL.

  Yes; if they give us help.

AIBRIC.

  They are besotting you as they besot
  The crazy herdsman that will tell his fellows
  That he has been all night upon the hills,
  Riding to hurley, or in the battle-host
  With the ever-living.

FORGAEL.

                        What if he speak the truth,
  And for a dozen hours have been a part
  Of that more powerful life?

AIBRIC.

                              His wife knows better.
  Has she not seen him lying like a log,
  Or fumbling in a dream about the house?
  And if she hear him mutter of wild riders,
  She knows that it was but the cart-horse coughing
  That set him to the fancy.

FORGAEL.

                             All would be well
  Could we but give us wholly to the dreams,
  And get into their world that to the sense
  Is shadow, and not linger wretchedly
  Among substantial things; for it is dreams
  That lift us to the flowing, changing world
  That the heart longs for. What is love itself,
  Even though it be the lightest of light love,
  But dreams that hurry from beyond the world
  To make low laughter more than meat and drink,
  Though it but set us sighing? Fellow-wanderer,
  Could we but mix ourselves into a dream,
  Not in its image on the mirror!

AIBRIC.

                                  While
  We’re in the body that’s impossible.

FORGAEL.

  And yet I cannot think they’re leading me
  To death; for they that promised to me love
  As those that can outlive the moon have known it,
  Had the world’s total life gathered up, it seemed,
  Into their shining limbs—I’ve had great teachers.
  Aengus and Edain ran up out of the wave—
  You’d never doubt that it was life they promised
  Had you looked on them face to face as I did,
  With so red lips, and running on such feet,
  And having such wide-open, shining eyes.

AIBRIC.

  It’s certain they are leading you to death.
  None but the dead, or those that never lived,
  Can know that ecstasy. Forgael! Forgael!
  They have made you follow the man-headed birds,
  And you have told me that their journey lies
  Towards the country of the dead.

FORGAEL.

                                   What matter
  If I am going to my death, for there,
  Or somewhere, I shall find the love they have promised.
  That much is certain. I shall find a woman,
  One of the ever-living, as I think—
  One of the laughing people—and she and I
  Shall light upon a place in the world’s core,
  Where passion grows to be a changeless thing,
  Like charmed apples made of chrysoprase,
  Or chrysoberyl, or beryl, or chrysolite;
  And there, in juggleries of sight and sense,
  Become one movement, energy, delight,
  Until the overburthened moon is dead.

    [_A number of SAILORS enter hurriedly._]

FIRST SAILOR.

  Look there! there in the mist! a ship of spice!
  And we are almost on her!

SECOND SAILOR.

                            We had not known
  But for the ambergris and sandalwood.

FIRST SAILOR.

  No; but opoponax and cinnamon.

FORGAEL.

    [_Taking the tiller from AIBRIC._]

  The ever-living have kept my bargain for me,
  And paid you on the nail.

AIBRIC.

                            Take up that rope
  To make her fast while we are plundering her.

FIRST SAILOR.

  There is a king and queen upon her deck,
  And where there is one woman there’ll be others.

AIBRIC.

  Speak lower, or they’ll hear.

FIRST SAILOR.

                                They cannot hear;
  They are too busy with each other. Look!
  He has stooped down and kissed her on the lips.

SECOND SAILOR.

  When she finds out we have better men aboard
  She may not be too sorry in the end.

FIRST SAILOR.

  She will be like a wild cat; for these queens
  Care more about the kegs of silver and gold,
  And the high fame that come to them in marriage,
  Than a strong body and a ready hand.

SECOND SAILOR.

  There’s nobody is natural but a robber,
  And that is why the world totters about
  Upon its bandy legs.

AIBRIC.

                       Run at them now,
  And overpower the crew while yet asleep!

    [_The SAILORS go out._

    [_Voices and the clashing of swords are heard from the
    other ship, which cannot be seen because of the sail._

A VOICE.

  Armed men have come upon us! O, I am slain!

ANOTHER VOICE.

  Wake all below!

ANOTHER VOICE.

  Why have you broken our sleep?

FIRST VOICE.

  Armed men have come upon us! O, I am slain!

FORGAEL.

    [_Who has remained at the tiller._]

  There! there they come! Gull, gannet, or diver,
  But with a man’s head, or a fair woman’s,
  They hover over the masthead awhile
  To wait their friends; but when their friends have come
  They’ll fly upon that secret way of theirs.
  One—and one—a couple—five together;
  And I will hear them talking in a minute.
  Yes, voices! but I do not catch the words.
  Now I can hear. There’s one of them that says:
  ‘How light we are, now we are changed to birds!’
  Another answers: ‘Maybe we shall find
  Our heart’s desire now that we are so light.’
  And then one asks another how he died,
  And says: ‘A sword-blade pierced me in my sleep.’
  And now they all wheel suddenly and fly
  To the other side, and higher in the air.
  And now a laggard with a woman’s head
  Comes crying, ‘I have run upon the sword.
  I have fled to my beloved in the air,
  In the waste of the high air, that we may wander
  Among the windy meadows of the dawn.’
  But why are they still waiting? why are they
  Circling and circling over the masthead?
  What power that is more mighty than desire
  To hurry to their hidden happiness
  Withholds them now? Have the ever-living ones
  A meaning in that circling overhead?
  But what’s the meaning? [_He cries out._] Why do you linger there?
  Why do you not run to your desire,
  Now that you have happy winged bodies?

    [_His voice sinks again._

  Being too busy in the air and the high air,
  They cannot hear my voice; but what’s the meaning?

    [_The SAILORS have returned. DECTORA is with them. She
    is dressed in pale green, with copper ornaments on her
    dress, and has a copper crown upon her head. Her hair
    is dull red._

FORGAEL.

    [_Turning and seeing her._]

  Why are you standing with your eyes upon me?
  You are not the world’s core. O no, no, no!
  That cannot be the meaning of the birds.
  You are not its core. My teeth are in the world,
  But have not bitten yet.

DECTORA.

                           I am a queen,
  And ask for satisfaction upon these
  Who have slain my husband and laid hands upon me.

    [_Breaking loose from the SAILORS who are holding her._]

  Let go my hands!

FORGAEL.

                   Why do you cast a shadow?
  Where do you come from? Who brought you to this place?
  They would not send me one that casts a shadow.

DECTORA.

  Would that the storm that overthrew my ships,
  And drowned the treasures of nine conquered nations,
  And blew me hither to my lasting sorrow,
  Had drowned me also. But, being yet alive,
  I ask a fitting punishment for all
  That raised their hands against him.

FORGAEL.

                                       There are some
  That weigh and measure all in these waste seas—
  They that have all the wisdom that’s in life,
  And all that prophesying images
  Made of dim gold rave out in secret tombs;
  They have it that the plans of kings and queens
  Are dust on the moth’s wing; that nothing matters
  But laughter and tears—laughter, laughter, and tears;
  That every man should carry his own soul
  Upon his shoulders.

DECTORA.

                      You’ve nothing but wild words,
  And I would know if you will give me vengeance.

FORGAEL.

  When she finds out I will not let her go—
  When she knows that.

DECTORA.

                       What is it that you are muttering—
  That you’ll not let me go? I am a queen.

FORGAEL.

  Although you are more beautiful than any,
  I almost long that it were possible;
  But if I were to put you on that ship,
  With sailors that were sworn to do your will,
  And you had spread a sail for home, a wind
  Would rise of a sudden, or a wave so huge,
  It had washed among the stars and put them out,
  And beat the bulwark of your ship on mine,
  Until you stood before me on the deck—
  As now.

DECTORA.

          Does wandering in these desolate seas
  And listening to the cry of wind and wave
  Bring madness?

FORGAEL.

  Queen, I am not mad.

DECTORA.

  And yet you say the water and the wind
  Would rise against me.

FORGAEL.

                         No, I am not mad—
  If it be not that hearing messages
  From lasting watchers, that outlive the moon,
  At the most quiet midnight is to be stricken.

DECTORA.

  And did those watchers bid you take me captive?

FORGAEL.

  Both you and I are taken in the net.
  It was their hands that plucked the winds awake
  And blew you hither; and their mouths have promised
  I shall have love in their immortal fashion.
  They gave me that old harp of the nine spells
  That is more mighty than the sun and moon,
  Or than the shivering casting-net of the stars,
  That none might take you from me.

DECTORA.

    [_First trembling back from the mast where the harp is,
    and then laughing._]

                                   For a moment
  Your raving of a message and a harp
  More mighty than the stars half troubled me.
  But all that’s raving. Who is there can compel
  The daughter and granddaughter of kings
  To be his bedfellow?

FORGAEL.

                       Until your lips
  Have called me their beloved, I’ll not kiss them.

DECTORA.

  My husband and my king died at my feet,
  And yet you talk of love.

FORGAEL.

                            The movement of time
  Is shaken in these seas, and what one does
  One moment has no might upon the moment
  That follows after.

DECTORA.

                      I understand you now.
  You have a Druid craft of wicked sound
  Wrung from the cold women of the sea—
  A magic that can call a demon up,
  Until my body give you kiss for kiss.

FORGAEL.

  Your soul shall give the kiss.

DECTORA.

                                 I am not afraid,
  While there’s a rope to run into a noose
  Or wave to drown. But I have done with words,
  And I would have you look into my face
  And know that it is fearless.

FORGAEL.

                                 Do what you will,
  For neither I nor you can break a mesh
  Of the great golden net that is about us.

DECTORA.

  There’s nothing in the world that’s worth a fear.

    [_She passes FORGAEL and stands for a moment looking
    into his face._

  I have good reason for that thought.

    [_She runs suddenly on to the raised part of the poop._

                                       And now
  I can put fear away as a queen should.

    [_She mounts on to the bulwark and turns towards
    FORGAEL._

  Fool, fool! Although you have looked into my face
  You do not see my purpose. I shall have gone
  Before a hand can touch me.

FORGAEL [_folding his arms_].

                              My hands are still;
  The ever-living hold us. Do what you will,
  You cannot leap out of the golden net.

FIRST SAILOR.

  No need to drown, for, if you will pardon us
  And measure out a course and bring us home,
  We’ll put this man to death.

DECTORA.

  I promise it.

FIRST SAILOR.

  There is none to take his side.

AIBRIC.

                                  I am on his side.
  I’ll strike a blow for him to give him time
  To cast his dreams away.

    [_AIBRIC goes in front of FORGAEL with drawn sword.
    FORGAEL takes the harp._

FIRST SAILOR.

  No other’ll do it.

    [_The SAILORS throw AIBRIC on one side. He falls upon
    the deck towards the poop. They lift their swords to
    strike FORGAEL, who is about to play the harp. The
    stage begins to darken. The SAILORS hesitate in fear._

SECOND SAILOR.

  He has put a sudden darkness over the moon.

DECTORA.

  Nine swords with handles of rhinoceros horn
  To him that strikes him first!

FIRST SAILOR.

  I will strike him first.

    [_He goes close up to FORGAEL with his sword lifted.
    The harp begins to give out a faint light. The scene
    has become so dark that the only light is from the
    harp._

  [_Shrinking back._] He has caught the crescent moon out of the sky,
  And carries it between us.

SECOND SAILOR.

                             Holy fire
  Has come into the jewels of the harp
  To burn us to the marrow if we strike.

DECTORA.

  I’ll give a golden galley full of fruit,
  That has the heady flavour of new wine,
  To him that wounds him to the death.

FIRST SAILOR.

                                       I’ll do it.
  For all his spells will vanish when he dies,
  Having their life in him.

SECOND SAILOR.

                           Though it be the moon
  That he is holding up between us there,
  I will strike at him.

THE OTHERS.

  And I! And I! And I!

    [_FORGAEL plays the harp._

FIRST SAILOR.

    [_Falling into a dream suddenly._]

  But you were saying there is somebody
  Upon that other ship we are to wake.
  You did not know what brought him to his end,
  But it was sudden.

SECOND SAILOR.

                     You are in the right;
  I had forgotten that we must go wake him.

DECTORA.

  He has flung a Druid spell upon the air,
  And set you dreaming.

SECOND SAILOR.

                        How can we have a wake
  When we have neither brown nor yellow ale?

FIRST SAILOR.

  I saw a flagon of brown ale aboard her.

THIRD SAILOR.

  How can we raise the keen that do not know
  What name to call him by?

FIRST SAILOR.

                            Come to his ship.
  His name will come into our thoughts in a minute.
  I know that he died a thousand years ago,
  And has not yet been waked.

SECOND SAILOR [_beginning to keen_].

                              Ohone! O! O! O!
  The yew bough has been broken into two,
  And all the birds are scattered.

ALL THE SAILORS.

  O! O! O! O!

    [_They go out keening._

DECTORA.

  Protect me now, gods, that my people swear by.

    [_AIBRIC has risen from the ground where he had fallen.
    He has begun looking for his sword as if in a dream._

AIBRIC.

  Where is my sword that fell out of my hand
  When I first heard the news? Ah, there it is!

    [_He goes dreamily towards the sword, but DECTORA runs
    at it and takes it up before he can reach it._

AIBRIC [_sleepily_].

  Queen, give it me.

DECTORA.

  No, I have need of it.

AIBRIC.

  Why do you need a sword? But you may keep it,
  Now that he’s dead I have no need of it,
  For everything is gone.

A SAILOR.

    [_Calling from the other ship._]

                         Come hither, Aibric,
  And tell me who it is that we are waking.

AIBRIC.

    [_Half to DECTORA, half to himself._]

  What name had that dead king? Arthur of Britain?
  No, no—not Arthur. I remember now.
  It was golden-armed Iollan, and he died
  Brokenhearted, having lost his queen
  Through wicked spells. That is not all the tale,
  For he was killed. O! O! O! O! O! O!
  For golden-armed Iollan has been killed.

    [_He goes out._

    [_While he has been speaking, and through part of what
    follows, one hears the wailing of the SAILORS from the
    other ship. DECTORA stands with the sword lifted in
    front of FORGAEL._

DECTORA.

  I will end all your magic on the instant.

    [_Her voice becomes dreamy, and she lowers the sword
    slowly, and finally lets it fall. She spreads out her
    hair. She takes off her crown and lays it upon the
    deck._

  This sword is to lie beside him in the grave.
  It was in all his battles. I will spread my hair,
  And wring my hands, and wail him bitterly,
  For I have heard that he was proud and laughing,
  Blue-eyed, and a quick runner on bare feet,
  And that he died a thousand years ago.
  O! O! O!

    [_FORGAEL changes the tune._

           But no, that is not it.
  I knew him well, and while I heard him laughing
  They killed him at my feet. O! O! O! O!
  For golden-armed Iollan that I loved.
  But what is it that made me say I loved him?
  It was that harper put it in my thoughts,
  But it is true. Why did they run upon him,
  And beat the golden helmet with their swords?

FORGAEL.

  Do you not know me, lady? I am he
  That you are weeping for.

DECTORA.

                            No, for he is dead.
  O! O! O! for golden-armed Iollan.

FORGAEL.

  It was so given out, but I will prove
  That the grave-diggers in a dreamy frenzy
  Have buried nothing but my golden arms.
  Listen to that low-laughing string of the moon
  And you will recollect my face and voice,
  For you have listened to me playing it
  These thousand years.

  [_He starts up, listening to the birds. The harp
  slips from his hands, and remains leaning
  against the bulwarks behind him. The light
  goes out of it._

                        What are the birds at there?
  Why are they all a-flutter of a sudden?
  What are you calling out above the mast?
  If railing and reproach and mockery
  Because I have awakened her to love
  My magic strings, I’ll make this answer to it:
  Being driven on by voices and by dreams
  That were clear messages from the ever-living,
  I have done right. What could I but obey?
  And yet you make a clamour of reproach.

DECTORA [_laughing_].

  Why, it’s a wonder out of reckoning
  That I should keen him from the full of the moon
  To the horn, and he be hale and hearty.

FORGAEL.

  How have I wronged her now that she is merry?
  But no, no, no! your cry is not against me.
  You know the councils of the ever-living,
  And all that tossing of your wings is joy,
  And all that murmuring’s but a marriage song;
  But if it be reproach, I answer this:
  There is not one among you that made love
  By any other means. You call it passion,
  Consideration, generosity;
  But it was all deceit, and flattery
  To win a woman in her own despite,
  For love is war, and there is hatred in it;
  And if you say that she came willingly—

DECTORA.

  Why do you turn away and hide your face,
  That I would look upon for ever?

FORGAEL.

  My grief.

DECTORA.

  Have I not loved you for a thousand years?

FORGAEL.

  I never have been golden-armed Iollan.

DECTORA.

  I do not understand. I know your face
  Better than my own hands.

FORGAEL.

                            I have deceived you
  Out of all reckoning.

DECTORA.

                        Is it not true
  That you were born a thousand years ago,
  In islands where the children of Aengus wind
  In happy dances under a windy moon,
  And that you’ll bring me there?

FORGAEL.

                                  I have deceived you;
  I have deceived you utterly.

DECTORA.

                               How can that be?
  Is it that though your eyes are full of love
  Some other woman has a claim on you,
  And I’ve but half?

FORGAEL.

  Oh, no!

DECTORA.

                              And if there is,
  If there be half a hundred more, what matter?
  I’ll never give another thought to it;
  No, no, nor half a thought; but do not speak.
  Women are hard and proud and stubborn-hearted,
  Their heads being turned with praise and flattery;
  And that is why their lovers are afraid
  To tell them a plain story.

FORGAEL.

                              That’s not the story;
  But I have done so great a wrong against you,
  There is no measure that it would not burst.
  I will confess it all.

DECTORA.

                  What do I care,
  Now that my body has begun to dream,
  And you have grown to be a burning sod
  In the imagination and intellect?
  If something that’s most fabulous were true—
  If you had taken me by magic spells,
  And killed a lover or husband at my feet—
  I would not let you speak, for I would know
  That it was yesterday and not to-day
  I loved him; I would cover up my ears,
  As I am doing now. [_A pause._] Why do you weep?

FORGAEL.

  I weep because I’ve nothing for your eyes
  But desolate waters and a battered ship.

DECTORA.

  O, why do you not lift your eyes to mine?

FORGAEL.

  I weep—I weep because bare night’s above,
  And not a roof of ivory and gold.

DECTORA.

  I would grow jealous of the ivory roof,
  And strike the golden pillars with my hands.
  I would that there was nothing in the world
  But my beloved—that night and day had perished,
  And all that is and all that is to be,
  All that is not the meeting of our lips.

FORGAEL.

  I too, I too. Why do you look away?
  Am I to fear the waves, or is the moon
  My enemy?

DECTORA.

            I looked upon the moon,
  Longing to knead and pull it into shape
  That I might lay it on your head as a crown.
  But now it is your thoughts that wander away,
  For you are looking at the sea. Do you not know
  How great a wrong it is to let one’s thought
  Wander a moment when one is in love?

  [_He has moved away. She follows him. He is
  looking out over the sea, shading his eyes._]

  Why are you looking at the sea?

FORGAEL.

  Look there!

DECTORA.

  What is there but a troop of ash-grey birds
  That fly into the west?

FORGAEL.

  But listen, listen!

DECTORA.

  What is there but the crying of the birds?

FORGAEL.

  If you’ll but listen closely to that crying
  You’ll hear them calling out to one another
  With human voices.

DECTORA.

                     O, I can hear them now.
  What are they? Unto what country do they fly?

FORGAEL.

  To unimaginable happiness.
  They have been circling over our heads in the air,
  But now that they have taken to the road
  We have to follow, for they are our pilots;
  And though they’re but the colour of grey ash,
  They’re crying out, could you but hear their words,
  ‘There is a country at the end of the world
  Where no child’s born but to outlive the moon.’

    [_The SAILORS come in with AIBRIC. They are in great
    excitement._

FIRST SAILOR.

  The hold is full of treasure.

SECOND SAILOR.

  Full to the hatches.

FIRST SAILOR.

  Treasure and treasure.

THIRD SAILOR.

  Boxes of precious spice.

FIRST SAILOR.

  Ivory images with amethyst eyes.

THIRD SAILOR.

  Dragons with eyes of ruby.

FIRST SAILOR.

                              The whole ship
  Flashes as if it were a net of herrings.

THIRD SAILOR.

  Let’s home; I’d give some rubies to a woman.

SECOND SAILOR.

  There’s somebody I’d give the amethyst eyes to.

FIRST SAILOR.

  Let’s home and spend it in our villages.

AIBRIC.

    [_Silencing them with a gesture._]

  We would return to our own country, Forgael,
  For we have found a treasure that’s so great
  Imagination cannot reckon it.
  And having lit upon this woman there,
  What more have you to look for on the seas?

FORGAEL.

  I cannot—I am going on to the end.
  As for this woman, I think she is coming with me.

AIBRIC.

  The ever-living have made you mad; but no,
  It was this woman in her woman’s vengeance
  That drove you to it, and I fool enough
  To fancy that she’d bring you home again.
  ’Twas you that egged him to it, for you know
  That he is being driven to his death.

DECTORA.

  That is not true, for he has promised me
  An unimaginable happiness.

AIBRIC.

  And if that happiness be more than dreams,
  More than the froth, the feather, the dustwhirl,
  The crazy nothing that I think it is,
  It shall be in the country of the dead,
  If there be such a country.

DECTORA.

                              No, not there,
  But in some island where the life of the world
  Leaps upward, as if all the streams o’ the world
  Had run into one fountain.

AIBRIC.

                             Speak to him.
  He knows that he is taking you to death;
  Speak—he will not deny it.

DECTORA.

  Is that true?

FORGAEL.

  I do not know for certain, but I know
  That I have the best of pilots.

AIBRIC.

                                  Shadows, illusions,
  That the shape-changers, the ever-laughing ones,
  The immortal mockers have cast into his mind,
  Or called before his eyes.

DECTORA.

                             O carry me
  To some sure country, some familiar place.
  Have we not everything that life can give
  In having one another?

FORGAEL.

                          How could I rest
  If I refused the messengers and pilots
  With all those sights and all that crying out?

DECTORA.

  But I will cover up your eyes and ears,
  That you may never hear the cry of the birds,
  Or look upon them.

FORGAEL.

                     Were they but lowlier
  I’d do your will, but they are too high—too high.

DECTORA.

  Being too high, their heady prophecies
  But harry us with hopes that come to nothing,
  Because we are not proud, imperishable,
  Alone and winged.

FORGAEL.

                    Our love shall be like theirs
  When we have put their changeless image on.

DECTORA.

  I am a woman, I die at every breath.

AIBRIC.

  Let the birds scatter for the tree is broken.
  And there’s no help in words. [_To the SAILORS._] To the other ship,
  And I will follow you and cut the rope
  When I have said farewell to this man here,
  For neither I nor any living man
  Will look upon his face again.

    [_The SAILORS go out._

FORGAEL [_to DECTORA_]

                                Go with him,
  For he will shelter you and bring you home.

AIBRIC.

    [_Taking FORGAEL’S hand._]

  I’ll do it for his sake.

DECTORA.

                           No. Take this sword
  And cut the rope, for I go on with Forgael.

AIBRIC.

    [_Half-falling into the keen._]

  The yew bough has been broken into two,
  And all the birds are scattered—O! O! O!
  Farewell! farewell!

    [_He goes out._

DECTORA.

                      The sword is in the rope—
  The rope’s in two—it falls into the sea,
  It whirls into the foam. O ancient worm,
  Dragon that loved the world and held us to it,
  You are broken, you are broken. The world drifts away,
  And I am left alone with my beloved,
  Who cannot put me from his sight for ever.
  We are alone for ever, and I laugh,
  Forgael, because you cannot put me from you.
  The mist has covered the heavens, and you and I
  Shall be alone for ever. We two—this crown—
  I half remember. It has been in my dreams.
  Bend lower, O king, that I may crown you with it.
  O flower of the branch, O bird among the leaves,
  O silver fish that my two hands have taken
  Out of the running stream, O morning star,
  Trembling in the blue heavens like a white fawn
  Upon the misty border of the wood,
  Bend lower, that I may cover you with my hair,
  For we will gaze upon this world no longer.

    [_The scene darkens, and the harp once more begins
    to burn as with a faint fire. FORGAEL is kneeling at
    DECTORA’S feet._

FORGAEL.

    [_Gathering DECTORA’S hair about him._]

  Beloved, having dragged the net about us,
  And knitted mesh to mesh, we grow immortal;
  And that old harp awakens of itself
  To cry aloud to the grey birds, and dreams,
  That have had dreams for father, live in us.
﻿THE COUNTESS CATHLEEN




    ‘_The sorrowful are dumb for thee._’
                  Lament of MORION SHEHONE for
                         MISS MARY BOURKE.




TO MAUD GONNE.




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    SHEMUS RUA, _a peasant_
    TEIG, _his son_
    ALEEL, _a young bard_
    MAURTEEN, _a gardener_
    THE COUNTESS CATHLEEN
    OONA, _her foster-mother_
    MAIRE, _wife of Shemus Rua_
    TWO DEMONS _disguised as merchants_
    MUSICIANS
    PEASANTS, SERVANTS, &C.
    ANGELICAL BEINGS, SPIRITS, AND FAERIES

_The scene is laid in Ireland, and in old times._




THE COUNTESS CATHLEEN.




ACT I.


    _The cottage of SHEMUS REA. The door into the open air
    is at right side of room. There is a window at one
    side of the door, and a little shrine of the Virgin
    Mother at the other. At the back is a door opening into
    a bedroom, and at the left side of the room a pantry
    door. A wood of oak, beech, hazel, and quicken is seen
    through the window half hidden in vapour and twilight.
    MAIRE watches TEIG, who fills a pot with water. He
    stops as if to listen, and spills some of the water._

MAIRE.

    You are all thumbs.

TEIG.

                 Hear how the dog bays, mother,
    And how the gray hen flutters in the coop.
    Strange things are going up and down the land,
    These famine times: by Tubber-vanach crossroads
    A woman met a man with ears spread out,
    And they moved up and down like wings of bats.

MAIRE.

    Shemus stays late.

TEIG.

                     By Carrick-orus churchyard,
    A herdsman met a man who had no mouth,
    Nor ears, nor eyes: his face a wall of flesh;
    He saw him plainly by the moon.

MAIRE.

[_Going over to the little shrine._]

                                White Mary,
    Bring Shemus home out of the wicked woods;
    Save Shemus from the wolves; Shemus is daring;
    And save him from the demons of the woods,
    Who have crept out and wander on the roads,
    Deluding dim-eyed souls now newly dead,
    And those alive who have gone crazed with famine.
    Save him, White Mary Virgin.

TEIG.

                                  And but now
    I thought I heard far-off tympans and harps.

    [_Knocking at the door._

MAIRE.

    Shemus has come.

TEIG.

                    May he bring better food
    Than the lean crow he brought us yesterday.

    [_MAIRE opens the door, and SHEMUS comes in with a dead
    wolf on his shoulder._

MAIRE.

    Shemus, you are late home: you have been lounging
    And chattering with some one: you know well
    How the dreams trouble me, and how I pray,
    Yet you lie sweating on the hill from morn,
    Or linger at the crossways with all comers,
    Telling or gathering up calamity.

SHEMUS.

    You would rail my head off. Here is a good dinner.

    [_He throws the wolf on the table._

    A wolf is better than a carrion crow.
    I searched all day: the mice and rats and hedgehogs
    Seemed to be dead, and I could hardly hear
    A wing moving in all the famished woods,
    Though the dead leaves and clauber of four forests
    Cling to my footsole. I turned home but now,
    And saw, sniffing the floor in a bare cow-house,
    This young wolf here: the crossbow brought him down.

MAIRE.

    Praise be the saints!          [_After a pause._
                      Why did the house dog bay?

SHEMUS.

    He heard me coming and smelt food—what else?

TEIG.

    We will not starve awhile.

SHEMUS.

    What food is within?

TEIG.

    There is a bag half full of meal, a pan
    Half full of milk.

SHEMUS.

    And we have one old hen.

TEIG.

    The bogwood were less hard.

MAIRE.

                               Before you came
    She made a great noise in the hencoop, Shemus.
    What fluttered in the window?

TEIG.

                                Two horned owls
    Have blinked and fluttered on the window sill
    From when the dog began to bay.

SHEMUS.

    Hush, hush.

    [_He fits an arrow to the crossbow, and goes towards
    the door. A sudden burst of music without._

    They are off again: ladies or gentlemen
    Travel in the woods with tympan and with harp.
    Teig, put the wolf upon the biggest hook
    And shut the door.

    [_TEIG goes into the cupboard with the wolf: returns
    and fastens the door behind him._

                   Sit on the creepy stool
    And call up a whey face and a crying voice,
    And let your head be bowed upon your knees.

    [_He opens the door of the cabin._

    Come in, your honours: a full score of evenings
    This threshold worn away by many a foot
    Has been passed only by the snails and birds
    And by our own poor hunger-shaken feet.

    [_The COUNTESS CATHLEEN, ALEEL, who carries a small
    square harp, OONA, and a little group of fantastically
    dressed musicians come in._

CATHLEEN.

    Are you so hungry?

TEIG.

    [_From beside the fire._]

                       Lady, I fell but now,
    And lay upon the threshold like a log.
    I have not tasted a crust for these four days.

    [_The COUNTESS CATHLEEN empties her purse on to the
    table._

CATHLEEN.

    Had I more money I would give it you,
    But we have passed by many cabins to-day;
    And if you come to-morrow to my house
    You shall have twice the sum. I am the owner
    Of a long empty castle in these woods.

MAIRE.

    Then you are Countess Cathleen: you and yours
    Are ever welcome under my poor thatch.
    Will you sit down and warm you by the sods?

CATHLEEN.

    We must find out this castle in the wood
    Before the chill o’ the night.

    [_The musicians begin to tune their instruments._

                                 Do not blame me,
    Good woman, for the tympan and the harp:
    I was bid fly the terror of the times
    And wrap me round with music and sweet song
    Or else pine to my grave. I have lost my way;
    Aleel, the poet, who should know these woods,
    Because we met him on their border but now
    Wandering and singing like the foam of the sea,
    Is so wrapped up in dreams of terrors to come
    That he can give no help.

MAIRE.

    [_Going to the door with her._]

                             You’re almost there.
    There is a trodden way among the hazels
    That brings your servants to their marketing.

ALEEL.

    When we are gone draw to the door and the bolt,
    For, till we lost them half an hour ago,
    Two gray horned owls hooted above our heads
    Of terrors to come. Tympan and harp awake!
    For though the world drift from us like a sigh,
    Music is master of all under the moon;
    And play ‘The Wind that blows by Cummen Strand.’

    [_Music._

[_Sings._]

    _Impetuous heart, be still, be still:
    Your sorrowful love may never be told;
    Cover it up with a lonely tune.
    He who could bend all things to His will
    Has covered the door of the infinite fold
    With the pale stars and the wandering moon._

    [_While he is singing the COUNTESS CATHLEEN, OONA, and
    the musicians go out._

ALEEL.

    Shut to the door and shut the woods away,
    For, till they had vanished in the thick of the leaves,
    Two gray horned owls hooted above our heads.

    [_He goes out._

MAIRE.

[_Bolting the door._]

    When wealthy and wise folk wander from their peace
    And fear wood things, poor folk may draw the bolt
    And pray before the fire.

    [_SHEMUS counts out the money, and rings a piece upon
    the table._

SHEMUS.

                           The Mother of God,
    Hushed by the waving of the immortal wings,
    Has dropped in a doze and cannot hear the poor:
    I passed by Margaret Nolan’s; for nine days
    Her mouth was green with dock and dandelion;
    And now they wake her.

MAIRE.

                            I will go the next;
    Our parents’ cabins bordered the same field.

SHEMUS.

    God, and the Mother of God, have dropped asleep,
    For they are weary of the prayers and candles;
    But Satan pours the famine from his bag,
    And I am mindful to go pray to him
    To cover all this table with red gold.
    Teig, will you dare me to it?

TEIG.

    Not I, father.

MAIRE.

    O Shemus, hush, maybe your mind might pray
    In spite o’ the mouth.

SHEMUS.

    Two crowns and twenty pennies.

MAIRE.

    Is yonder quicken wood?

SHEMUS.

[_Picking the bough from the table._]

                            He swayed about,
    And so I tied him to a quicken bough
    And slung him from my shoulder.

MAIRE.

    [_Taking the bough from him._]

                           Shemus! Shemus!
    What, would you burn the blessed quicken wood?
    A spell to ward off demons and ill faeries.
    You know not what the owls were that peeped in,
    For evil wonders live in this old wood,
    And they can show in what shape please them best.
    And we have had no milk to leave of nights
    To keep our own good people kind to us.
    And Aleel, who has talked with the great Sidhe,
    Is full of terrors to come.

    [_She lays the bough on a chair._

SHEMUS.

                           I would eat my supper
    With no less mirth if squatting by the hearth
    Were dulacaun or demon of the pit
    Clawing its knees, its hoof among the ashes.

    [_He rings another piece of money. A sound of footsteps
    outside the door._

MAIRE.

    Who knows what evil you have brought to us?
    I fear the wood things, Shemus.

    [_A knock at the door._

    Do not open.

SHEMUS.

    A crown and twenty pennies are not enough
    To stop the hole that lets the famine in.

    [_The little shrine falls._

MAIRE.

    Look! look!

SHEMUS.

[_Crushing it underfoot._]

        The Mother of God has dropped asleep,
    And all her household things have gone to wrack.

MAIRE.

    O Mary, Mother of God, be pitiful!

    [_SHEMUS opens the door. TWO MERCHANTS stand without.
    They have bands of gold round their foreheads, and each
    carries a bag upon his shoulder._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Have you food here?

SHEMUS.

    For those who can pay well.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    We are rich merchants seeking merchandise.

SHEMUS.

    Come in, your honours.

MAIRE.

                    No, do not come in:
    We have no food, not even for ourselves.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    There is a wolf on the big hook in the cupboard.

    [_They enter._

SHEMUS.

    Forgive her: she is not used to quality,
    And is half crazed with being much alone.
    How did you know I had taken a young wolf?
    Fine wholesome food, though maybe somewhat strong.

    [_The SECOND MERCHANT sits down by the fire and begins
    rubbing his hands. The FIRST MERCHANT stands looking at
    the quicken bough on the chair._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    I would rest here: the night is somewhat chilly,
    And my feet footsore going up and down
    From land to land and nation unto nation:
    The fire burns dimly; feed it with this bough.

    [_SHEMUS throws the bough into the fire. The FIRST
    MERCHANT sits down on the chair. The MERCHANTS’ chairs
    are on each side of the fire. The table is between
    them. Each lays his bag before him on the table. The
    night has closed in somewhat, and the main light comes
    from the fire._

MAIRE.

    What have you in the bags?

SHEMUS.

                          Don’t mind her, sir:
    Women grow curious and feather-thoughted
    Through being in each other’s company
    More than is good for them.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                              Our bags are full
    Of golden pieces to buy merchandise.

    [_They pour gold pieces on to the table out of their
    bags. It is covered with the gold pieces. They shine in
    the firelight. MAIRE goes to the door of pantry, and
    watches the MERCHANTS, muttering to herself._

TEIG.

    These are great gentlemen.

FIRST MERCHANT.

[_Taking a stone bottle out of his bag._]

                          Come to the fire,
    Here is the headiest wine you ever tasted.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Wine that can hush asleep the petty war
    Of good and evil, and awake instead
    A scented flame flickering above that peace
    The bird of prey knows well in his deep heart.

SHEMUS.

[_Bringing drinking-cups._]

    I do not understand you, but your wine
    Sets me athirst: its praise made your eyes lighten.
    I am thirsting for it.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                         Ay, come drink and drink,
    I bless all mortals who drink long and deep.
    My curse upon the salt-strewn road of monks.

[_TEIG and SHEMUS sit down at the table and drink._]

TEIG.

    You must have seen rare sights and done rare things.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    What think you of the master whom we serve?

SHEMUS.

    I have grown weary of my days in the world
    Because I do not serve him.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                              More of this
    When we have eaten, for we love right well
    A merry meal, a warm and leaping fire
    And easy hearts.

SHEMUS.

    Come, Maire, and cook the wolf.

MAIRE.

    I will not cook for you.

SHEMUS.

    Maire is mad.

    [_TEIG and SHEMUS stand up and stagger about._

SHEMUS.

    That wine is the suddenest wine man ever tasted.

MAIRE.

    I will not cook for you: you are not human:
    Before you came two horned owls looked at us;
    The dog bayed, and the tongue of Shemus maddened.
    When you came in the Virgin’s blessed shrine
    Fell from its nail, and when you sat down here
    You poured out wine as the wood sidheogs do
    When they’d entice a soul out of the world.
    Why did you come to us? Was not death near?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We are two merchants.

MAIRE.

                         If you be not demons,
    Go and give alms among the starving poor,
    You seem more rich than any under the moon.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    If we knew where to find deserving poor,
    We would give alms.

MAIRE.

    Then ask of Father John.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We know the evils of mere charity,
    And have been planning out a wiser way.
    Let each man bring one piece of merchandise.

MAIRE.

    And have the starving any merchandise?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We do but ask what each man has.

MAIRE.

                                  Merchants,
    Their swine and cattle, fields and implements,
    Are sold and gone.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    They have not sold all yet.

MAIRE.

    What have they?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    They have still their souls.

    [_MAIRE shrieks. He beckons to TEIG and SHEMUS._

                                     Come hither.
    See you these little golden heaps? Each one
    Is payment for a soul. From charity
    We give so great a price for those poor flames.
    Say to all men we buy men’s souls—away.

    [_They do not stir._

    This pile is for you and this one here for you.

MAIRE.

    Shemus and Teig, Teig—

TEIG.

    Out of the way.

    [_SHEMUS and TEIG take the money._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Cry out at cross-roads and at chapel doors
    And market-places that we buy men’s souls,
    Giving so great a price that men may live
    In mirth and ease until the famine ends.

    [_TEIG and SHEMUS go out._

MAIRE [_kneeling_].

    Destroyers of souls, may God destroy you quickly!

FIRST MERCHANT.

    No curse can overthrow the immortal demons.

MAIRE.

    You shall at last dry like dry leaves, and hang
    Nailed like dead vermin to the doors of God.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    You shall be ours. This famine shall not cease.
    You shall eat grass, and dock, and dandelion,
    And fail till this stone threshold seem a wall,
    And when your hands can scarcely drag your body
    We shall be near you.

    [_To SECOND MERCHANT._

    Bring the meal out.

    [_The SECOND MERCHANT brings the bag of meal from the
    pantry._

                           Burn it.      [_MAIRE faints._
    Now she has swooned, our faces go unscratched;
    Bring me the gray hen, too.

    _The SECOND MERCHANT goes out through the door and
    returns with the hen strangled. He flings it on the
    floor. While he is away the FIRST MERCHANT makes up
    the fire. The FIRST MERCHANT then fetches the pan of
    milk from the pantry, and spills it on the ground. He
    returns, and brings out the wolf, and throws it down by
    the hen._

                        These need much burning.
    This stool and this chair here will make good fuel.

    [_He begins breaking the chair._

    My master will break up the sun and moon
    And quench the stars in the ancestral night
    And overturn the thrones of God and the angels.




ACT II.


    _A great hall in the castle of the COUNTESS CATHLEEN.
    There is a large window at the farther end, through
    which the forest is visible. The wall to the right
    juts out slightly, cutting off an angle of the room. A
    flight of stone steps leads up to a small arched door
    in the jutting wall. Through the door can be seen a
    little oratory. The hall is hung with ancient tapestry,
    representing the loves and wars and huntings of the
    Fenian and Red Branch heroes. There are doors to the
    right and left. On the left side OONA sits, as if
    asleep, beside a spinning-wheel. The COUNTESS CATHLEEN
    stands farther back and more to the right, close to
    a group of the musicians, still in their fantastic
    dresses, who are playing a merry tune._

CATHLEEN.

    Be silent, I am tired of tympan and harp,
    And tired of music that but cries ‘Sleep, sleep,’
    Till joy and sorrow and hope and terror are gone.

    [_The COUNTESS CATHLEEN goes over to OONA._

    You were asleep?

OONA.

                  No, child, I was but thinking
    Why you have grown so sad.

CATHLEEN.

    The famine frets me.

OONA.

    I have lived now near ninety winters, child,
    And I have known three things no doctor cures—
    Love, loneliness, and famine; nor found refuge
    Other than growing old and full of sleep.
    See you where Oisin and young Niamh ride
    Wrapped in each other’s arms, and where the Fenians
    Follow their hounds along the fields of tapestry;
    How merry they lived once, yet men died then.
    Sit down by me, and I will chaunt the song
    About the Danaan nations in their raths
    That Aleel sang for you by the great door
    Before we lost him in the shadow of leaves.

CATHLEEN.

    No, sing the song he sang in the dim light,
    When we first found him in the shadow of leaves,
    About King Fergus in his brazen car
    Driving with troops of dancers through the woods.

    [_She crouches down on the floor, and lays her head on
    OONA’S knees._

OONA.

    Dear heart, make a soft cradle of old tales,
    And songs, and music: wherefore should you sadden
    For wrongs you cannot hinder? The great God
    Smiling condemns the lost: be mirthful: He
    Bids youth be merry and old age be wise.

CATHLEEN.

    Tympan and harp awaken wandering dreams.

A VOICE [_without_].

    You may not see the Countess.

ANOTHER VOICE.

    I must see her.

    [_Sound of a short struggle. A SERVANT enters from door
    to R._

SERVANT.

    The gardener is resolved to speak with you.
    I cannot stay him.

CATHLEEN.

    You may come, Maurteen.

    [_The GARDENER, an old man, comes in from the R., and
    the SERVANT goes out._

GARDENER.

    Forgive my working clothes and the dirt on me.
    I bring ill words, your ladyship,—too bad
    To send with any other.

CATHLEEN.

                          These bad times,
    Can any news be bad or any good?

GARDENER.

    A crowd of ugly lean-faced rogues last night—
    And may God curse them!—climbed the garden wall.
    There is scarce an apple now on twenty trees,
    And my asparagus and strawberry beds
    Are trampled into clauber, and the boughs
    Of peach and plum-trees broken and torn down
    For some last fruit that hung there. My dog, too,
    My old blind Simon, him who had no tail,
    They murdered—God’s red anger seize them!

CATHLEEN.

    I know how pears and all the tribe of apples
    Are daily in your love—how this ill chance
    Is sudden doomsday fallen on your year;
    So do not say no matter. I but say
    I blame the famished season, and not you.
    Then be not troubled.

GARDENER.

    I thank your ladyship.

CATHLEEN.

    What rumours and what portents of the famine?

GARDENER.

    The yellow vapour, in whose folds it came,
    That creeps along the hedges at nightfall,
    Rots all the heart out of my cabbages.
    I pray against it.

    [_He goes towards the door, then pauses._

                   If her ladyship
    Would give me an old crossbow, I would watch
    Behind a bush and guard the pears of nights
    And make a hole in somebody I know of.

CATHLEEN.

    They will give you a long draught of ale below.

    [_The GARDENER goes out._

OONA.

    What did he say?—he stood on my deaf side.

CATHLEEN.

    His apples are all stolen. Pruning time,
    And the slow ripening of his pears and apples,
    For him is a long, heart-moving history.

OONA.

    Now lay your head once more upon my knees.
    I will sing how Fergus drove his brazen cars.

    [_She chaunts with the thin voice of age._

    _Who will go drive with Fergus now,
    And pierce the deep woods’ woven shade,
    And dance upon the level shore?
    Young man, lift up your russet brow,
    And lift your tender eyelids, maid,
    And brood on hopes and fears no more._
    You have dropped down again into your trouble.
    You do not hear me.

CATHLEEN.

                        Ah, sing on, old Oona,
    I hear the horn of Fergus in my heart.

OONA.

    I do not know the meaning of the song.
    I am too old.

CATHLEEN.

    The horn is calling, calling.

OONA.

    _And no more turn aside and brood
    Upon Love’s bitter mystery;
    For Fergus rules the brazen cars,
    And rules the shadows of the wood,
    And the white breast of the dim sea
    And all dishevelled wandering stars._

THE SERVANT’S VOICE [_without_].

    The Countess Cathleen must not be disturbed.

ANOTHER VOICE.

    Man, I must see her.

CATHLEEN.

    Who now wants me, Paudeen?

SERVANT [_from the door_].

    A herdsman and his history.

CATHLEEN.

    He may come.

    [_The HERDSMAN enters from the door to R._

HERDSMAN.

    Forgive this dusty gear: I have come far.
    My sheep were taken from the fold last night.
    You will be angry: I am not to blame.
    But blame these robbing times.

CATHLEEN.

                           No blame’s with you.
    I blame the famine.

HERDSMAN.

                     Kneeling, I give thanks.
    When gazing on your face, the poorest, Lady,
    Forget their poverty, the rich their care.

CATHLEEN.

    What rumours and what portents of the famine?

HERDSMAN.

    As I came down the lane by Tubber-vanach
    A boy and man sat cross-legged on two stones,
    With moving hands and faces famine-thin,
    Gabbling to crowds of men and wives and boys
    Of how two merchants at a house in the woods
    Buy souls for hell, giving so great a price
    That men may live through all the dearth in plenty.
    The vales are famine-crazy—I am right glad
    My home is on the mountain near to God.

    [_He turns to go._

CATHLEEN.

    They will give you ale and meat before you go.
    You must have risen at dawn to come so far.
    Keep your bare mountain—let the world drift by,
    The burden of its wrongs rests not on you.

HERDSMAN.

    I am content to serve your ladyship.

    [_He goes._

OONA.

    What did he say?—he stood on my deaf side.
    He seemed to give you word of woful things.

CATHLEEN.

    A story born out of the dreaming eyes
    And crazy brain and credulous ears of famine.
    O, I am sadder than an old air, Oona,
    My heart is longing for a deeper peace
    Than Fergus found amid his brazen cars:
    Would that like Edain my first forebear’s daughter,
    Who followed once a twilight’s piercing tune,
    I could go down and dwell among the Sidhe
    In their old ever-busy honeyed land.

OONA.

    You should not say such things—they bring ill-luck.

CATHLEEN.

    The image of young Edain on the arras,
    Walking along, one finger lifted up;
    And that wild song of the unending dance
    Of the dim Danaan nations in their raths,
    Young Aleel sang for me by the great door,
    Before we lost him in the shadow of leaves,
    Have filled me full of all these wicked words.

    [_The SERVANT enters hastily, followed by three men.
    Two are peasants._

SERVANT.

    The steward of the castle brings two men
    To talk with you.

STEWARD.

                   And tell the strangest story
    The mouth of man has uttered.

CATHLEEN.

                                More food taken;
    Yet learned theologians have laid down
    That he who has no food, offending no way,
    May take his meat and bread from too-full larders.

FIRST PEASANT.

    We come to make amends for robbery.
    I stole five hundred apples from your trees,
    And laid them in a hole; and my friend here
    Last night stole two large mountain sheep of yours
    And hung them on a beam under his thatch.

SECOND PEASANT.

    His words are true.

FIRST PEASANT.

               Since then our luck has changed.
    As I came down the lane by Tubber-vanach
    I fell on Shemus Rua and his son,
    And they led me where two great gentlemen
    Buy souls for money, and they bought my soul.
    I told my friend here—my friend also trafficked.

SECOND PEASANT.

    His words are true.

FIRST PEASANT.

                       Now people throng to sell,
    Noisy as seagulls tearing a dead fish.
    There soon will be no man or woman’s soul
    Unbargained for in fivescore baronies.

SECOND PEASANT.

    His words are true.

FIRST PEASANT.

                  When we had sold we talked,
    And having no more comfortable life
    Than this that makes us warm—our souls being bartered
    For all this money—

SECOND PEASANT.

    And this money here.

    [_They bring handfuls of money from their pockets.
    CATHLEEN starts up._

FIRST PEASANT.

    And fearing much to hang for robbery,
    We come to pay you for the sheep and fruit.
    How do you price them?

CATHLEEN.

                        Gather up your money.
    Think you that I would touch the demons’ gold?
    Begone, give twice, thrice, twenty times their money,
    And buy your souls again. I will pay all.

FIRST PEASANT.

    We will not buy our souls again: a soul
    But keeps the flesh out of its merriment.
    We shall be merry and drunk from moon to moon.
    Keep from our way. Let no one stop our way.

    [_They go._

CATHLEEN [_to servant_].

    Follow and bring them here again—beseech them.

    [_The SERVANT goes._

[_To STEWARD._]

    Steward, you know the secrets of this house.
    How much have I in gold?

STEWARD.

    A hundred thousand.

CATHLEEN.

    How much have I in castles?

STEWARD.

    As much more.

CATHLEEN.

    How much have I in pastures?

STEWARD.

    As much more.

CATHLEEN.

    How much have I in forests?

STEWARD.

    As much more.

CATHLEEN.

    Keeping this house alone, sell all I have;
    Go to some distant country and come again
    With many herds of cows and ships of grain.

STEWARD.

    God’s blessing light upon your ladyship;
    You will have saved the land.

CATHLEEN.

    Make no delay.

    [_He goes._

[_Enter SERVANT._]

    How did you thrive? Say quickly. You are pale.

SERVANT.

    Their eyes burn like the eyes of birds of prey:
    I did not dare go near.

CATHLEEN.

                           God pity them!
    Bring all the old and ailing to this house,
    For I will have no sorrow of my own
    From this day onward.

    [_The SERVANT goes out. Some of the musicians follow
    him, some linger in the doorway. The COUNTESS CATHLEEN
    kneels beside OONA._

                    Can you tell me, mother,
    How I may mend the times, how staunch this wound
    That bleeds in the earth, how overturn the famine,
    How drive these demons to their darkness again?

OONA.

    The demons hold our hearts between their hands,
    For the apple is in our blood, and though heart break
    There is no medicine but Michael’s trump.
    Till it has ended parting and old age
    And hail and rain and famine and foolish laughter;
    The dead are happy, the dust is in their ears.




ACT III.


    _Hall of the COUNTESS CATHLEEN as before. SERVANT
    enters and goes towards the oratory door._

SERVANT.

    Here is yet another would see your ladyship.

CATHLEEN [_within_].

    Who calls me?

SERVANT.

          There is a man would speak with you,
    And by his face he has some pressing news,
    Some moving tale.

CATHLEEN [_coming to chapel door_].

                     I cannot rest or pray,
    For all day long the messengers run hither
    On one another’s heels, and every message
    More evil than the one that had gone before.
    Who is the messenger?

SERVANT.

    Aleel, the poet.

CATHLEEN.

    There is no hour he is not welcome to me,
    Because I know of nothing but a harp-string
    That can remember happiness.

    [_SERVANT goes out and ALEEL comes in._

                                And now
    I grow forgetful of evil for awhile.

ALEEL.

    I have come to bid you leave this castle, and fly
    Out of these woods.

CATHLEEN.

                      What evil is there here,
    That is not everywhere from this to the sea?

ALEEL.

    They who have sent me walk invisible.

CATHLEEN.

    Men say that the wise people of the raths
    Have given you wisdom.

ALEEL.

                          I lay in the dusk
    Upon the grassy margin of a lake
    Among the hills, where none of mortal creatures
    But the swan comes—my sleep became a fire.
    One walked in the fire with birds about his head.

CATHLEEN.

    Ay, Aengus of the birds.

ALEEL.

                            He may be Aengus,
    But it may be he bears an angelical name.
    Lady, he bid me call you from these woods;
    He bids you bring Oona, your foster-mother,
    And some few serving-men and live in the hills
    Among the sounds of music and the light
    Of waters till the evil days are gone.

[_He kneels._]

    For here some terrible death is waiting you;
    Some unimaginable evil, some great darkness
    That fable has not dreamt of, nor sun nor moon
    Scattered.

CATHLEEN.

    And he had birds about his head?

ALEEL.

    Yes, yes, white birds. He bids you leave this house
    With some old trusty serving-man, who will feed
    All that are starving and shelter all that wander
    While there is food and house-room.

CATHLEEN.

                                    He bids me go
    Where none of mortal creatures but the swan
    Dabbles, and there you would pluck the harp when the trees
    Had made a heavy shadow about our door,
    And talk among the rustling of the reeds
    When night hunted the foolish sun away,
    With stillness and pale tapers. No—no—no.
    I cannot. Although I weep, I do not weep
    Because that life would be most happy, and here
    I find no way, no end. Nor do I weep
    Because I had longed to look upon your face,
    But that a night of prayer has made me weary.

ALEEL.

[_Throwing his arms about her feet._]

    Let Him that made mankind, the angels and devils
    And death and plenty mend what He has made,
    For when we labour in vain and eye still sees
    Heart breaks in vain.

CATHLEEN.

    How would that quiet end?

ALEEL.

    How but in healing?

CATHLEEN.

                        You have seen my tears.
    And I can see your hand shake on the floor.

ALEEL [_faltering_].

    I thought but of healing. He was angelical.

CATHLEEN.

[_Turning away from him._]

    No, not angelical, but of the old gods,
    Who wander about the world to waken the heart—
    The passionate, proud heart that all the angels
    Leaving nine heavens empty would rock to sleep.

    [_She goes to the chapel door; ALEEL holds his clasped
    hands towards her for a moment hesitatingly, and then
    lets them fall beside him._

    Do not hold out to me beseeching hands.
    This heart shall never waken on earth. I have sworn
    By her whose heart the seven sorrows have pierced
    To pray before this altar until my heart
    Has grown to Heaven like a tree, and there
    Rustled its leaves till Heaven has saved my people.

ALEEL [_who has risen_].

    When one so great has spoken of love to one
    So little as I, although to deny him love,
    What can he but hold out beseeching hands,
    Then let them fall beside him, knowing how greatly
    They have overdared?

    [_He goes towards the door of the hall. The COUNTESS
    CATHLEEN takes a few steps towards him._

CATHLEEN.

                        If the old tales are true,
    Queens have wed shepherds and kings beggar-maids;
    God’s procreant waters flowing about your mind
    Have made you more than kings or queens; and not you
    But I am the empty pitcher.

ALEEL.

                                  Being silent,
    I have said all—farewell, farewell; and yet no,
    Give me your hand to kiss.

CATHLEEN.

                              I kiss your brow,
    But will not say farewell. I am often weary,
    And I would hear the harp-string.

ALEEL.

                                  I cannot stay,
    For I would hide my sorrow among the hills—
    Listen, listen, the hills are calling me.

    [_They listen for a moment._

CATHLEEN.

    I hear the cry of curlew.

ALEEL.

                          Then I will out
    Where I can hear wind cry and water cry
    And curlew cry: how does the saying go
    That calls them the three oldest cries in the world?
    Farewell, farewell, I will go wander among them,
    Because there is no comfort under a roof-tree.

    [_He goes out._

CATHLEEN.

[_Looking through the door after him._]

    I cannot see him. He has come to the great door.
    I must go pray. Would that my heart and mind
    Were as little shaken as this candle-light.

    [_She goes into the chapel. The TWO MERCHANTS enter._

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Who was the man that came from the great door
    While we were still in the shadow?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Aleel, her lover.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    It may be that he has turned her thought from us
    And we can gather our merchandise in peace.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    No, no, for she is kneeling.

SECOND MERCHANT.

                              Shut the door.
    Are all our drudges here?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    [_Closing the chapel door._]

                            I bid them follow.
    Can you not hear them breathing upon the stairs?
    I have sat this hour under the elder-tree.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    I had bid you rob her treasury, and yet
    I found you sitting drowsed and motionless,
    Your chin bowed to your knees, while on all sides,
    Bat-like from bough and roof and window-ledge,
    Clung evil souls of men, and in the woods,
    Like streaming flames, floated upon the winds
    The elemental creatures.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                        I have fared ill;
    She prayed so hard I could not cross the threshold
    Till this young man had turned her prayer to dreams.
    You have had a man to kill: how have you fared?

SECOND MERCHANT.

    I lay in the image of a nine-monthed bonyeen,
    By Tubber-vanach cross-roads: Father John
    Came, sad and moody, murmuring many prayers;
    I seemed as though I came from his own sty;
    He saw the one brown ear; the breviary dropped;
    He ran; I ran, I ran into the quarry;
    He fell a score of yards.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                        Now that he is dead
    We shall be too much thronged with souls to-morrow.
    Did his soul escape you?

SECOND MERCHANT.

                          I thrust it in the bag.
    But the hand that blessed the poor and raised the Host
    Tore through the leather with sharp piety.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Well, well, to labour—here is the treasury door.

    [_They go out by the left-hand door, and enter again
    in a little while, carrying full bags upon their
    shoulders._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Brave thought, brave thought—a shining thought of mine!
    She now no more may bribe the poor—no more
    Cheat our great master of his merchandise,
    While our heels dangle at the house in the woods,
    And grass grows on the threshold, and snails crawl
    Along the window-pane and the mud floor.
    Brother, where wander all these dwarfish folk,
    Hostile to men, the people of the tides?

SECOND MERCHANT.

[_Going to the door._]

    They are gone. They have already wandered away,
    Unwilling labourers.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    I will call them hither.

    [_He opens the window._

    Come hither, hither, hither, water-folk:
    Come, all you elemental populace;
    Leave lonely the long-hoarding surges: leave
    The cymbals of the waves to clash alone,
    And, shaking the sea-tangles from your hair,
    Gather about us.      [_After a pause._
                    I can hear a sound
    As from waves beating upon distant strands;
    And the sea-creatures, like a surf of light,
    Pour eddying through the pathways of the oaks;
    And as they come, the sentient grass and leaves
    Bow towards them, and the tall, drouth-jaded oaks
    Fondle the murmur of their flying feet.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    The green things love unknotted hearts and minds;
    And neither one with angels or with us,
    Nor risen in arms with evil nor with good,
    In laughter roves the litter of the waves.

    [_A crowd of faces fill up the darkness outside the
    window. A figure separates from the others and speaks._

THE SPIRIT.

    We come unwillingly, for she whose gold
    We must now carry to the house in the woods
    Is dear to all our race. On the green plain,
    Beside the sea, a hundred shepherds live
    To mind her sheep; and when the nightfall comes
    They leave a hundred pans of white ewes’ milk
    Outside their doors, to feed us when the dawn
    Has driven us out of Finbar’s ancient house,
    And broken the long dance under the hill.

FIRST MERCHANT.

[_Making a sign upon the air._]

    Obey! I make a sign upon your hearts.

THE SPIRIT.

    The sign of evil burns upon our hearts,
    And we obey.

    [_They crowd through the window, and take out of the
    bags a small bag each. They are dressed in green robes
    and have ruddy hair. They are a little less than the
    size of men and women._

FIRST MERCHANT.

            And now begone—begone!      [_They go._
    I bid them go, for, being garrulous
    And flighty creatures, they had soon begun
    To deafen us with their sea-gossip. Now
    We must go bring more money. Brother, brother,
    I long to see my master’s face again,
    For I turn homesick.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    I too tire of toil.

    [_They go out, and return as before, with their bags
    full._

SECOND MERCHANT.

[_Pointing to the oratory._]

    How may we gain this woman for our lord?
    This pearl, this turquoise fastened in his crown
    Would make it shine like His we dare not name.
    Now that the winds are heavy with our kind,
    Might we not kill her, and bear off her spirit
    Before the mob of angels were astir?

    [_A diadem and a heap of jewels fall from the bag._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Who tore the bag?

SECOND MERCHANT.

                    The finger of Priest John
    When he fled through the leather. I had thought
    Because his was an old and little spirit
    The tear would hardly matter.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                              This comes, brother,
    Of stealing souls that are not rightly ours.
    If we would win this turquoise for our lord,
    It must go dropping down of its freewill.
    She will have heard the noise. She will stifle us
    With holy names.

    [_He goes to the oratory door and opens it a little,
    and then closes it._]

    No, she has fallen asleep.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    The noise wakened the household. While you spoke
    I heard chairs moved, and heard folk’s shuffling feet.
    And now they are coming hither.

A VOICE [_within_].

    It was here.

ANOTHER VOICE.

    No, further away.

ANOTHER VOICE.

    It was in the western tower.

ANOTHER VOICE.

    Come quickly; we will search the western tower.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We still have time—they search the distant rooms.
    Call hither the fading and the unfading fires.

SECOND MERCHANT.

[_Going to the window._]

    There are none here. They tired and strayed from hence—
    Unwilling labourers.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    I will draw them in.

    [_He cries through the window._

    Come hither, you lost souls of men, who died
    In drunken sleep, and by each other’s hands
    When they had bartered you—come hither all
    Who mourn among the scenery of your sins,
    Turning to animal and reptile forms,
    The visages of passions; hither, hither—
    Leave marshes and the reed-encumbered pools,
    You shapeless fires, that were the souls of men,
    And are a fading wretchedness.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    They come not.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    [_Making a sign upon the air._]

    Come hither, hither, hither.

SECOND MERCHANT.

                                I can hear
    A crying as of storm-distempered reeds.
    The fading and the unfading fires rise up
    Like steam out of the earth; the grass and leaves
    Shiver and shrink away and sway about,
    Blown by unnatural gusts of ice-cold air.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    They are one with all the beings of decay,
    Ill longings, madness, lightning, famine, drouth.

    [_The whole stage is gradually filled with vague forms,
    some animal shapes, some human, some mere lights._

    Come you—and you—and you, and lift these bags.

A SPIRIT.

    We are too violent; mere shapes of storm.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Come you—and you—and you, and lift these bags.

A SPIRIT.

    We are too feeble, fading out of life.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Come you, and you, who are the latest dead,
    And still wear human shape: the shape of power.

    [_The two robbing peasants of the last scene come
    forward. Their faces have withered from much pain._

    Now, brawlers, lift the bags of gold.

FIRST PEASANT.

                                        Yes, yes!
    Unwillingly, unwillingly; for she,
    Whose gold we bear upon our shoulders thus,
    Has endless pity even for lost souls
    In her good heart. At moments, now and then,
    When plunged in horror, brooding each alone,
    A memory of her face floats in on us.
    It brings a crowned misery, half repose,
    And we wail one to other; we obey,
    For heaven’s many-angled star reversed,
    Now sign of evil, burns into our hearts.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    When these pale sapphires and these diadems
    And these small bags of money are in our house,
    The burning shall give over—now begone.

SECOND MERCHANT.

[_Lifting the diadem to put it upon his head._]

    No—no—no. I will carry the diadem.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    No, brother, not yet.
    For none can carry her treasures wholly away
    But spirits that are too light for good and evil,
    Or, being evil, can remember good.
    Begone! [_The spirits vanish._] I bade them go, for they are lonely,
    And when they see aught living love to sigh.
    [_Pointing to the oratory._] Brother, I heard a sound in there—a sound
    That troubles me.

SECOND MERCHANT.

[_Going to the door of the oratory and peering through it._]

                            Upon the altar steps
    The Countess tosses, murmuring in her sleep
    A broken _Paternoster_.

[_The FIRST MERCHANT goes to the door and stands beside him._]

    She is grown still.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    A great plan floats into my mind—no wonder,
    For I come from the ninth and mightiest Hell,
    Where all are kings. I will wake her from her sleep,
    And mix with all her thoughts a thought to serve.

    [_He calls through the door._

    May we be well remembered in your prayers!

    [_The COUNTESS CATHLEEN wakes, and comes to the door of
    the oratory. The MERCHANTS descend into the room again.
    She stands at the top of the stone steps._

CATHLEEN.

    What would you, sirs?

FIRST MERCHANT.

                    We are two merchant men,
    New come from foreign lands. We bring you news.
    Forgive our sudden entry: the great door
    Was open, we came in to seek a face.

CATHLEEN.

    The door stands always open to receive,
    With kindly welcome, starved and sickly folk,
    Or any who would fly the woful times.
    Merchants, you bring me news?

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                  We saw a man
    Heavy with sickness in the Bog of Allan,
    Whom you had bid buy cattle. Near Fair Head
    We saw your grain ships lying all becalmed
    In the dark night, and not less still than they
    Burned all their mirrored lanthorns in the sea.

CATHLEEN.

    My thanks to God, to Mary, and the angels,
    I still have bags of money, and can buy
    Meal from the merchants who have stored it up,
    To prosper on the hunger of the poor.
    You have been far, and know the signs of things:
    When will this yellow vapour no more hang
    And creep about the fields, and this great heat
    Vanish away—and grass show its green shoots?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    There is no sign of change—day copies day,
    Green things are dead—the cattle too are dead,
    Or dying—and on all the vapour hangs
    And fattens with disease and glows with heat.
    In you is all the hope of all the land.

CATHLEEN.

    And heard you of the demons who buy souls?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    There are some men who hold they have wolves’ heads,
    And say their limbs, dried by the infinite flame,
    Have all the speed of storms; others again
    Say they are gross and little; while a few
    Will have it they seem much as mortals are,
    But tall and brown and travelled, like us, lady.
    Yet all agree a power is in their looks
    That makes men bow, and flings a casting-net
    About their souls, and that all men would go
    And barter those poor flames—their spirits—only
    You bribe them with the safety of your gold.

CATHLEEN.

    Praise be to God, to Mary, and the angels,
    That I am wealthy. Wherefore do they sell?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    The demons give a hundred crowns and more
    For a poor soul like his who lies asleep
    By your great door under the porter’s niche;
    A little soul not worth a hundred pence.
    But, for a soul like yours, I heard them say,
    They would give five hundred thousand crowns and more.

CATHLEEN.

    How can a heap of crowns pay for a soul?
    Is the green grave so terrible a thing?

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Some sell because the money gleams, and some
    Because they are in terror of the grave,
    And some because their neighbours sold before,
    And some because there is a kind of joy
    In casting hope away, in losing joy,
    In ceasing all resistance, in at last
    Opening one’s arms to the eternal flames,
    In casting all sails out upon the wind:
    To this—full of the gaiety of the lost—
    Would all folk hurry if your gold were gone.

CATHLEEN.

    There is a something, merchant, in your voice
    That makes me fear. When you were telling how
    A man may lose his soul and lose his God,
    Your eyes lighted, and the strange weariness
    That hangs about you vanished. When you told
    How my poor money serves the people—both—
    Merchants, forgive me—seemed to smile.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                      Man’s sins
    Move us to laughter only, we have seen
    So many lands and seen so many men.
    How strange that all these people should be swung
    As on a lady’s shoe-string—under them
    The glowing leagues of never-ending flame!

CATHLEEN.

    There is a something in you that I fear:
    A something not of us. Were you not born
    In some most distant corner of the world?

    [_The SECOND MERCHANT, who has been listening at the
    door to the right, comes forward, and as he comes a
    sound of voices and feet is heard through the door to
    his left._

SECOND MERCHANT [_aside to FIRST MERCHANT_].

    Away now—they are in the passage—hurry,
    For they will know us, and freeze up our hearts
    With Ave Marys, and burn all our skin
    With holy water.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                    Farewell: we must ride
    Many a mile before the morning come;
    Our horses beat the ground impatiently.

    [_They go out to R. A number of peasants enter at the
    same moment by the opposite door._

CATHLEEN.

    What would you?

A PEASANT.

                      As we nodded by the fire,
    Telling old histories, we heard a noise
    Of falling money. We have searched in vain.

CATHLEEN.

    You are too timid. I heard naught at all.

THE OLD PEASANT.

    Ay, we are timid, for a rich man’s word
    Can shake our houses, and a moon of drouth
    Shrivel our seedlings in the barren earth;
    We are the slaves of wind, and hail, and flood;
    Fear jogs our elbow in the market-place,
    And nods beside us on the chimney-seat.
    Ill-bodings are as native unto our hearts
    As are their spots unto the woodpeckers.

CATHLEEN.

    You need not shake with bodings in this house.

    [_OONA enters from the door to L._

OONA.

    The treasure-room is broken in—mavrone—mavrone;
    The door stands open and the gold is gone.

    [_The peasants raise a lamenting cry._

    CATHLEEN.

    Be silent.      [_The cry ceases._
              Saw you any one?

OONA.

                              Mavrone,
    That my good mistress should lose all this money.

CATHLEEN.

    You three upon my right hand, ride and ride;
    I will give a farm to him who finds the thieves.

    [_A man with keys at his girdle has entered while she
    was speaking._

A PEASANT.

    The porter trembles.

THE PORTER.

                      It is all no use;
    Demons were here. I sat beside the door
    In my stone niche, and two owls passed me by,
    Whispering with human voices.

THE OLD PEASANT.

    God forsakes us.

CATHLEEN.

    Old man, old man, He never closed a door
    Unless one opened. I am desolate,
    For a most sad resolve wakes in my heart:
    But always I have faith. Old men and women,
    Be silent; He does not forsake the world,
    But stands before it modelling in the clay
    And moulding there His image. Age by age
    The clay wars with His fingers and pleads hard
    For its old, heavy, dull, and shapeless ease;
    At times it crumbles and a nation falls,
    Now moves awry and demon hordes are born.

    [_The peasants cross themselves._

    But leave me now, for I am desolate,
    I hear a whisper from beyond the thunder.

    [_She steps down from the oratory door._

    Yet stay an instant. When we meet again
    I may have grown forgetful. Oona, take
    These two—the larder and the dairy keys.
    [_To THE OLD PEASANT._] But take you this. It opens the small room
    Of herbs for medicine, of hellebore,
    Of vervain, monkshood, plantain, and self-heal
    And all the others; and the book of cures
    Is on the upper shelf. You understand,
    Because you doctored goats and cattle once.

THE OLD PEASANT.

    Why do you do this, lady—did you see
    Your coffin in a dream?

CATHLEEN.

                            Ah, no, not that,
    A sad resolve wakes in me. I have heard
    A sound of wailing in unnumbered hovels,
    And I must go down, down, I know not where.
    Pray for the poor folk who are crazed with famine;
    Pray, you good neighbours.

    [_The peasants all kneel. The COUNTESS CATHLEEN ascends
    the steps to the door of the oratory, and, turning
    round, stands there motionless for a little, and then
    cries in a loud voice._]

                          Mary, queen of angels,
    And all you clouds on clouds of saints, farewell!




ACT IV.


    _The cabin of SHEMUS RUA. The TWO MERCHANTS are sitting
    one at each end of the table, with rolls of parchment
    and many little heaps of gold before them. Through an
    open door, at the back, one sees into an inner room, in
    which there is a bed. On the bed is the body of MAIRE
    with candles about it._

FIRST MERCHANT.

    The woman may keep robbing us no more,
    For there are only mice now in her coffers.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Last night, closed in the image of an owl,
    I hurried to the cliffs of Donegal,
    And saw, creeping on the uneasy surge,
    Those ships that bring the woman grain and meal;
    They are five days from us.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                  I hurried East,
    A gray owl flitting, flitting in the dew,
    And saw nine hundred oxen toil through Meath
    Driven on by goads of iron; they, too, brother,
    Are full five days from us.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Five days for traffic.

    [_While they have been speaking the peasants have come
    in, led by TEIG and SHEMUS, who take their stations,
    one on each side of the door, and keep them marshalled
    into rude order and encourage them from time to time
    with gestures and whispered words._

    Here throng they; since the drouth they go in throngs,
    Like autumn leaves blown by the dreary winds.
    Come, deal—come, deal.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Who will come deal with us?

SHEMUS.

    They are out of spirit, sir, with lack of food,
    Save four or five. Here, sir, is one of these;
    The others will gain courage in good time.

A MIDDLE-AGED MAN.

    I come to deal if you give honest price.

FIRST MERCHANT.

[_Reading in a parchment._]

    John Maher, a man of substance, with dull mind,
    And quiet senses and unventurous heart.
    The angels think him safe. Two hundred crowns,
    All for a soul, a little breath of wind.

THE MAN.

    I ask three hundred crowns. You have read there,
    That no mere lapse of days can make me yours.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    There is something more writ here—often at night
    He is wakeful from a dread of growing poor.
    There is this crack in you—two hundred crowns.

    [_THE MAN takes them and goes._

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Come, deal—one would half think you had no souls.
    If only for the credit of your parishes,
    Come, deal, deal, deal, or will you always starve?
    Maire, the wife of Shemus, would not deal,
    She starved—she lies in there with red wallflowers,
    And candles stuck in bottles round her bed.

A WOMAN.

    What price, now, will you give for mine?

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                      Ay, ay,
    Soft, handsome, and still young—not much, I think.

    [_Reading in the parchment._

    She has love letters in a little jar
    On the high shelf between the pepper-pot
    And wood-cased hour-glass.

THE WOMAN.

    O, the scandalous parchment!

FIRST MERCHANT [_reading_].

    She hides them from her husband, who buys horses,
    And is not much at home. You are almost safe.
    I give you fifty crowns.      [_She turns to go._
                            A hundred, then.

    [_She takes them, and goes into the crowd._

    Come—deal, deal, deal; it is for charity
    We buy such souls at all; a thousand sins
    Made them our master’s long before we came.
    Come, deal—come, deal. You seem resolved to starve
    Until your bones show through your skin. Come, deal,
    Or live on nettles, grass, and dandelion.
    Or do you dream the famine will go by?
    The famine is hale and hearty; it is mine
    And my great master’s; it shall no wise cease
    Until our purpose end: the yellow vapour
    That brought it bears it over your dried fields
    And fills with violent phantoms of the lost,
    And grows more deadly as day copies day.
    See how it dims the daylight. Is that peace
    Known to the birds of prey so dread a thing?
    They, and the souls obedient to our master,
    And those who live with that great other spirit
    Have gained an end, a peace, while you but toss
    And swing upon a moving balance beam.

    [_ALEEL enters; the wires of his harp are broken._

ALEEL.

    Here, take my soul, for I am tired of it;
    I do not ask a price.

FIRST MERCHANT [_reading_].

                        A man of songs:
    Alone in the hushed passion of romance,
    His mind ran all on sidheoges and on tales
    Of Fenian labours and the Red Branch kings,
    And he cared nothing for the life of man:
    But now all changes.

ALEEL.

                         Ay, because her face,
    The face of Countess Cathleen, dwells with me:
    The sadness of the world upon her brow:
    The crying of these strings grew burdensome,
    Therefore I tore them; see; now take my soul.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We cannot take your soul, for it is hers.

ALEEL.

    Ah, take it; take it. It nowise can help her,
    And, therefore, do I tire of it.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                   No; no.
    We may not touch it.

ALEEL.

                          Is your power so small,
    Must I then bear it with me all my days?
    May scorn close deep about you!

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                Lead him hence;
    He troubles me.

    [_TEIG and SHEMUS lead ALEEL into the crowd._

SECOND MERCHANT.

                 His gaze has filled me, brother,
    With shaking and a dreadful fear.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                  Lean forward
    And kiss the circlet where my master’s lips
    Were pressed upon it when he sent us hither:
    You will have peace once more.

    [_The SECOND MERCHANT kisses the gold circlet that is
    about the head of the FIRST MERCHANT._

SHEMUS.

                              He is called Aleel,
    And has been crazy now these many days;
    But has no harm in him: his fits soon pass,
    And one can go and lead him like a child.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Come, deal, deal, deal, deal, deal; you are all dumb?

SHEMUS.

    They say you beat the woman down too low.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    I offer this great price: a thousand crowns
    For an old woman who was always ugly.

[_An old peasant woman comes forward, and he takes up a parchment and
reads._]

    There is but little set down here against her;
    She stole fowl sometimes when the harvest failed,
    But always went to chapel twice a week,
    And paid her dues when prosperous. Take your money.

THE OLD PEASANT WOMAN [_curtseying_].

    God bless you, sir.      [_She screams._
                  O, sir, a pain went through me.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    That name is like a fire to all damned souls.
    Begone. [_She goes._] See how the red gold pieces glitter.
    Deal: do you fear because an old hag screamed?
    Are you all cowards?

A PEASANT.

                              Nay, I am no coward.
    I will sell half my soul.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    How half your soul?

THE PEASANT.

    Half my chance of heaven.

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                  It is writ here
    This man in all things takes the moderate course,
    He sits on midmost of the balance beam,
    And no man has had good of him or evil.
    Begone, we will not buy you.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Deal, come, deal.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    What, will you keep us from our ancient home,
    And from the eternal revelry? Come, deal,
    And we will hence to our great master again.
    Come, deal, deal, deal.

THE PEASANTS SHOUT.

    The Countess Cathleen comes!

CATHLEEN [_entering_].

    And so you trade once more?

FIRST MERCHANT.

                                In spite of you.
    What brings you here, saint with the sapphire eyes?

CATHLEEN.

    I come to barter a soul for a great price.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    What matter if the soul be worth the price?

CATHLEEN.

    The people starve, therefore the people go
    Thronging to you. I hear a cry come from them,
    And it is in my ears by night and day;
    And I would have five hundred thousand crowns,
    That I may feed them till the dearth go by;
    And have the wretched spirits you have bought
    For your gold crowns released and sent to God.
    The soul that I would barter is my soul.

A PEASANT.

    Do not, do not; the souls of us poor folk
    Are not precious to God as your soul is.
    O! what would heaven do without you, lady?

ANOTHER PEASANT.

    Look how their claws clutch in their leathern gloves.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Five hundred thousand crowns; we give the price,
    The gold is here; the spirits, while you speak,
    Begin to labour upward, for your face
    Sheds a great light on them and fills their hearts
    With those unveilings of the fickle light,
    Whereby our heavy labours have been marred
    Since first His spirit moved upon the deeps
    And stole them from us; even before this day
    The souls were but half ours, for your bright eyes
    Had pierced them through and robbed them of content.
    But you must sign, for we omit no form
    In buying a soul like yours; sign with this quill;
    It was a feather growing on the cock
    That crowed when Peter dared deny his Master,
    And all who use it have great honour in Hell.

    [_CATHLEEN leans forward to sign._

ALEEL.

[_Rushing forward and snatching the parchment from her._]

    Leave all things to the builder of the heavens.

CATHLEEN.

    I have no thoughts: I hear a cry—a cry.

ALEEL.

[_Casting the parchment on the ground._]

    I had a vision under a green hedge,
    A hedge of hips and haws—men yet shall hear
    The archangels rolling Satan’s empty skull
    Over the mountain-tops.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    Take him away.

    [_TEIG and SHEMUS drag him roughly away so that he
    falls upon the floor among the peasants. CATHLEEN picks
    up the parchment and signs, and then turns towards the
    peasants._

CATHLEEN.

    Take up the money; and now come with me.
    When we are far from this polluted place
    I will give everybody money enough.

    [_She goes out, the peasants crowding round her and
    kissing her dress. ALEEL and the TWO MERCHANTS are left
    alone._

SECOND MERCHANT.

    Now are our days of heavy labour done.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We have a precious jewel for Satan’s crown.

SECOND MERCHANT.

    We must away, and wait until she dies,
    Sitting above her tower as two gray owls,
    Watching as many years as may be, guarding
    Our precious jewel; waiting to seize her soul.

FIRST MERCHANT.

    We need but hover over her head in the air,
    For she has only minutes: when she came
    I saw the dimness of the tomb in her,
    And marked her walking as with leaden shoes
    And looking on the ground as though the worms
    Were calling her, and when she wrote her name
    Her heart began to break. Hush! hush! I hear
    The brazen door of Hell move on its hinges,
    And the eternal revelry float hither
    To hearten us.

SECOND MERCHANT.

                Leap, feathered, on the air
    And meet them with her soul caught in your claws.

    [_They rush out. ALEEL crawls into the middle of the
    room. The twilight has fallen and gradually darkens
    as the scene goes on. There is a distant muttering of
    thunder and a sound of rising storm._

ALEEL.

    The brazen door stands wide, and Balor comes
    Borne in his heavy car, and demons have lifted
    The age-weary eyelids from the eyes that of old
    Turned gods to stone; Barach the traitor comes;
    And the lascivious race, Cailitin,
    That cast a druid weakness and decay
    Over Sualtam’s and old Dectora’s child;
    And that great king Hell first took hold upon
    When he killed Naisi and broke Deirdre’s heart;
    And all their heads are twisted to one side,
    For when they lived they warred on beauty and peace
    With obstinate, crafty, sidelong bitterness.

    [_OONA enters, but remains standing by the door. ALEEL
    half rises, leaning upon one arm and one knee._]

    Crouch down, old heron, out of the blind storm.

OONA.

    Where is the Countess Cathleen? All this day
    She has been pale and weakly: when her hand
    Touched mine over the spindle her hand trembled,
    And now I do not know where she has gone.

ALEEL.

    Cathleen has chosen other friends than us,
    And they are rising through the hollow world.

    [_He points downwards._

    First, Orchil, her pale beautiful head alive,
    Her body shadowy as vapour drifting
    Under the dawn, for she who awoke desire
    Has but a heart of blood when others die;
    About her is a vapoury multitude
    Of women, alluring devils with soft laughter;
    Behind her a host heat of the blood made sin,
    But all the little pink-white nails have grown
    To be great talons.

    [_He seizes OONA and drags her into the middle of the
    room and points downwards with vehement gestures. The
    wind roars._]

                          They begin a song
    And there is still some music on their tongues.

OONA.

    [_Casting herself face downwards on the floor._]

    O maker of all, protect her from the demons,
    And if a soul must needs be lost, take mine.

    [_ALEEL kneels beside her, but does not seem to hear
    her words; he is gazing down as if through the earth.
    The peasants return. They carry the COUNTESS CATHLEEN
    and lay her upon the ground before OONA and ALEEL. She
    lies there as if dead._]

    O that so many pitchers of rough clay
    Should prosper and the porcelain break in two!

    [_She kisses the hands of the COUNTESS CATHLEEN._

A PEASANT.

    We were under the tree where the path turns
    When she grew pale as death and fainted away,
    And while we bore her hither, cloudy gusts
    Blackened the world and shook us on our feet:
    Draw the great bolt, for no man has beheld
    So black, bitter, blinding, and sudden a storm.

    [_One who is near the door draws the bolt._

OONA.

    Hush, hush, she has awakened from her swoon.

CATHLEEN.

    O hold me, and hold me tightly, for the storm
    Is dragging me away!

    [_OONA takes her in her arms. A woman begins to wail._

A PEASANT.

    Hush.

ANOTHER PEASANT.

    Hush.

A PEASANT WOMAN.

    Hush.

ANOTHER PEASANT WOMAN.

    Hush.

CATHLEEN [_half rising_].

    Lay all the bags of money at my feet.

    [_They lay the bags at her feet._

    And send and bring old Neal when I am dead,
    And bid him hear each man and judge and give:
    He doctors you with herbs, and can best say
    Who has the less and who the greater need.

A PEASANT WOMAN.

[_At the back of the crowd._]

    And will he give enough out of the bags
    To keep my children till the dearth go by?

ANOTHER PEASANT WOMAN.

    O Queen of Heaven and all you blessed Saints,
    Let us and ours be lost, so she be shriven.

CATHLEEN.

    Bend down your faces, Oona and Aleel:
    I gaze upon them as the swallow gazes
    Upon the nest under the eave, before
    He wander the loud waters: do not weep
    Too great a while, for there is many a candle
    On the high altar though one fall. Aleel,
    Who sang about the people of the raths,
    That know not the hard burden of the world,
    Having but breath in their kind bodies, farewell!
    And farewell, Oona, who spun flax with me
    Soft as their sleep when every dance is done:
    The storm is in my hair and I must go.

    [_She dies._

OONA.

    Bring me the looking-glass.

[_A woman brings it to her out of the inner room. OONA holds the glass
over the lips of the COUNTESS CATHLEEN. All is silent for a moment; and
then she speaks in a half scream._]

    O, she is dead!

A PEASANT WOMAN.

    She was the great white lily of the world.

ANOTHER PEASANT WOMAN.

    She was more beautiful than the pale stars.

AN OLD PEASANT WOMAN.

    The little plant I loved is broken in two.

    [_ALEEL takes the looking-glass from OONA and flings it
    upon the floor so that it is broken in many pieces._

ALEEL.

    I shatter you in fragments, for the face
    That brimmed you up with beauty is no more:
    And die, dull heart, for she whose mournful words
    Made you a living spirit has passed away
    And left you but a ball of passionate dust;
    And you, proud earth and plumy sea, fade out,
    For you may hear no more her faltering feet,
    But are left lonely amid the clamorous war
    Of angels upon devils.

[_He stands up; almost everyone is kneeling, but it has grown so dark
that only confused forms can be seen._]

                          And I who weep
    Call curses on you, Time and Fate and Change,
    And have no excellent hope but the great hour
    When you shall plunge headlong through bottomless space.

    [_A flash of lightning followed immediately by thunder._

A PEASANT WOMAN.

    Pull him upon his knees before his curses
    Have plucked thunder and lightning on our heads.

ALEEL.

    Angels and devils clash in the middle air,
    And brazen swords clang upon brazen helms:

[_A flash of lightning followed immediately by thunder._]

    Yonder a bright spear, cast out of a sling,
    Has torn through Balor’s eye, and the dark clans
    Fly screaming as they fled Moytura of old.

    [_Everything is lost in darkness._

AN OLD MAN.

    The Almighty, wrath at our great weakness and sin,
    Has blotted out the world and we must die.

    [_The darkness is broken by a visionary light. The
    peasants seem to be kneeling upon the rocky slope of a
    mountain, and vapour full of storm and ever-changing
    light is sweeping above them and behind them. Half in
    the light, half in the shadow, stand armed Angels.
    Their armour is old and worn, and their drawn swords
    dim and dinted. They stand as if upon the air in
    formation of battle and look downward with stern faces.
    The peasants cast themselves on the ground._

ALEEL.

    Look no more on the half-closed gates of Hell,
    But speak to me, whose mind is smitten of God,
    That it may be no more with mortal things;
    And tell of her who lies here.
    [_He seizes one of the Angels._] Till you speak
    You shall not drift into eternity.

THE ANGEL.

    The light beats down: the gates of pearl are wide,
    And she is passing to the floor of peace,
    And Mary of the seven times wounded heart
    Has kissed her lips, and the long blessed hair
    Has fallen on her face; the Light of Lights
    Looks always on the motive, not the deed,
    The Shadow of Shadows on the deed alone.

    [_ALEEL releases the Angel and kneels._

OONA.

    Tell them who walk upon the floor of peace
    That I would die and go to her I love;
    The years like great black oxen tread the world,
    And God the herdsman goads them on behind,
    And I am broken by their passing feet.

    [_A sound of far-off horns seems to come from the heart
    of the light. The vision melts away, and the forms of
    the kneeling peasants appear faintly in the darkness._]
﻿THE LAND OF HEART’S DESIRE




    ‘O Rose, thou art sick.’—_William Blake._




TO FLORENCE FARR




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    MAURTEEN BRUIN
    SHAWN BRUIN
    FATHER HART
    BRIDGET BRUIN
    MAIRE BRUIN
    A FAERY CHILD

_The scene is laid in the Barony of Kilmacowen, in the County of Sligo,
and the characters are supposed to speak in Gaelic. They wear the
costume of a century ago._




THE LAND OF HEART’S DESIRE


    _The kitchen of MAURTEEN BRUIN’S house. An open grate
    with a turf fire is at the left side of the room, with
    a table in front of it. There is a door leading to the
    open air at the back, and another door a little to its
    left, leading into an inner room. There is a window, a
    settle, and a large dresser on the right side of the
    room, and a great bowl of primroses on the sill of
    the window. MAURTEEN BRUIN, FATHER HART, and BRIDGET
    BRUIN are sitting at the table. SHAWN BRUIN is setting
    the table for supper. MAIRE BRUIN sits on the settle
    reading a yellow manuscript._

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    Because I bade her go and feed the calves,
    She took that old book down out of the thatch
    And has been doubled over it all day.
    We would be deafened by her groans and moans
    Had she to work as some do, Father Hart,
    Get up at dawn like me, and mend and scour;
    Or ride abroad in the boisterous night like you,
    The pyx and blessed bread under your arm.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    You are too cross.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    The young side with the young.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    She quarrels with my wife a bit at times,
    And is too deep just now in the old book,
    But do not blame her greatly; she will grow
    As quiet as a puff-ball in a tree
    When but the moons of marriage dawn and die
    For half a score of times.

FATHER HART.

                              Their hearts are wild
    As be the hearts of birds, till children come.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    She would not mind the griddle, milk the cow,
    Or even lay the knives and spread the cloth.

FATHER HART.

    I never saw her read a book before;
    What may it be?

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

                    I do not rightly know;
    It has been in the thatch for fifty years.
    My father told me my grandfather wrote it,
    Killed a red heifer and bound it with the hide.
    But draw your chair this way—supper is spread.
    And little good he got out of the book,
    Because it filled his house with roaming bards,
    And roaming ballad-makers and the like,
    And wasted all his goods.—Here is the wine:
    The griddle bread’s beside you, Father Hart.
    Colleen, what have you got there in the book
    That you must leave the bread to cool? Had I,
    Or had my father, read or written books
    There were no stocking full of silver and gold
    To come, when I am dead, to Shawn and you.

FATHER HART.

    You should not fill your head with foolish dreams.
    What are you reading?

MAIRE BRUIN.

                        How a Princess Edain,
    A daughter of a King of Ireland, heard
    A voice singing on a May Eve like this,
    And followed, half awake and half asleep,
    Until she came into the land of faery,
    Where nobody gets old and godly and grave,
    Where nobody gets old and crafty and wise,
    Where nobody gets old and bitter of tongue;
    And she is still there, busied with a dance,
    Deep in the dewy shadow of a wood,
    Or where stars walk upon a mountain-top.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Persuade the colleen to put by the book:
    My grandfather would mutter just such things,
    And he was no judge of a dog or horse,
    And any idle boy could blarney him:
    Just speak your mind.

FATHER HART.

                      Put it away, my colleen.
    God spreads the heavens above us like great wings,
    And gives a little round of deeds and days,
    And then come the wrecked angels and set snares,
    And bait them with light hopes and heavy dreams,
    Until the heart is puffed with pride and goes,
    Half shuddering and half joyous, from God’s peace:
    And it was some wrecked angel, blind from tears,
    Who flattered Edain’s heart with merry words.
    My colleen, I have seen some other girls
    Restless and ill at ease, but years went by
    And they grew like their neighbours and were glad
    In minding children, working at the churn,
    And gossiping of weddings and of wakes;
    For life moves out of a red flare of dreams
    Into a common light of common hours,
    Until old age bring the red flare again.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Yet do not blame her greatly, Father Hart,
    For she is dull while I am in the fields,
    And mother’s tongue were harder still to bear,
    But for her fancies: this is May Eve too,
    When the good people post about the world,
    And surely one may think of them to-night.
    Maire, have you the primroses to fling
    Before the door to make a golden path
    For them to bring good luck into the house?
    Remember, they may steal new-married brides
    After the fall of twilight on May Eve.

    [_MAIRE BRUIN goes over to the window and takes flowers
    from the bowl and strews them outside the door._

FATHER HART.

    You do well, daughter, because God permits
    Great power to the good people on May Eve.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    They can work all their will with primroses;
    Change them to golden money, or little flames
    To burn up those who do them any wrong.

MAIRE BRUIN [_in a dreamy voice_].

    I had no sooner flung them by the door
    Than the wind cried and hurried them away;
    And then a child came running in the wind
    And caught them in her hands and fondled them:
    Her dress was green: her hair was of red gold;
    Her face was pale as water before dawn.

FATHER HART.

    Whose child can this be?

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

                          No one’s child at all.
    She often dreams that someone has gone by
    When there was nothing but a puff of wind.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    They will not bring good luck into the house,
    For they have blown the primroses away;
    Yet I am glad that I was courteous to them,
    For are not they, likewise, children of God?

FATHER HART.

    Colleen, they are the children of the Fiend,
    And they have power until the end of Time,
    When God shall fight with them a great pitched battle
    And hack them into pieces.

MAIRE BRUIN.

                              He will smile,
    Father, perhaps, and open His great door,
    And call the pretty and kind into His house.

FATHER HART.

    Did but the lawless angels see that door,
    They would fall, slain by everlasting peace;
    And when such angels knock upon our doors
    Who goes with them must drive through the same storm.

    [_A knock at the door. MAIRE BRUIN opens it and then
    goes to the dresser and fills a porringer with milk and
    hands it through the door and takes it back empty and
    closes the door._

MAIRE BRUIN.

    A little queer old woman cloaked in green,
    Who came to beg a porringer of milk.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    The good people go asking milk and fire
    Upon May Eve.—Woe on the house that gives,
    For they have power upon it for a year.
    I knew you would bring evil on the house.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Who was she?

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Both the tongue and face were strange.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Some strangers came last week to Clover Hill;
    She must be one of them.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    I am afraid.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    The priest will keep all harm out of the house.

FATHER HART.

    The cross will keep all harm out of the house
    While it hangs there.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

                  Come, sit beside me, colleen,
    And put away your dreams of discontent,
    For I would have you light up my last days
    Like a bright torch of pine, and when I die
    I will make you the wealthiest hereabout:
    For hid away where nobody can find
    I have a stocking full of silver and gold.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    You are the fool of every pretty face,
    And I must pinch and pare that my son’s wife
    May have all kinds of ribbons for her head.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Do not be cross; she is a right good girl!
    The butter is by your elbow, Father Hart.
    My colleen, have not Fate and Time and Change
    Done well for me and for old Bridget there?
    We have a hundred acres of good land,
    And sit beside each other at the fire,
    The wise priest of our parish to our right,
    And you and our dear son to left of us.
    To sit beside the board and drink good wine
    And watch the turf smoke coiling from the fire
    And feel content and wisdom in your heart,
    This is the best of life; when we are young
    We long to tread a way none trod before,
    But find the excellent old way through love
    And through the care of children to the hour
    For bidding Fate and Time and Change good-bye.

    [_A knock at the door. MAIRE BRUIN opens it and then
    takes a sod of turf out of the hearth in the tongs and
    passes it through the door and closes the door and
    remains standing by it._

MAIRE BRUIN.

    A little queer old man in a green coat,
    Who asked a burning sod to light his pipe.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    You have now given milk and fire, and brought,
    For all you know, evil upon the house.
    Before you married you were idle and fine,
    And went about with ribbons on your head;
    And now you are a good-for-nothing wife.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Be quiet, mother!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    You are much too cross!

MAIRE BRUIN.

    What do I care if I have given this house,
    Where I must hear all day a bitter tongue,
    Into the power of faeries!

BRIDGET BRUIN.

                            You know well
    How calling the good people by that name
    Or talking of them over-much at all
    May bring all kinds of evil on the house.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Come, faeries, take me out of this dull house!
    Let me have all the freedom I have lost;
    Work when I will and idle when I will!
    Faeries, come, take me out of this dull world,
    For I would ride with you upon the wind,
    Run on the top of the dishevelled tide,
    And dance upon the mountains like a flame!

FATHER HART.

    You cannot know the meaning of your words.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Father, I am right weary of four tongues:
    A tongue that is too crafty and too wise,
    A tongue that is too godly and too grave,
    A tongue that is more bitter than the tide,
    And a kind tongue too full of drowsy love,
    Of drowsy love and my captivity.

    [_SHAWN BRUIN comes over to her and leads her to the
    settle._

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Do not blame me; I often lie awake
    Thinking that all things trouble your bright head—
    How beautiful it is—such broad pale brows
    Under a cloudy blossoming of hair!
    Sit down beside me here—these are too old,
    And have forgotten they were ever young.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    O, you are the great door-post of this house,
    And I, the red nasturtium, climbing up.

    [_She takes SHAWN’S hand, but looks shyly at the priest
    and lets it go._

FATHER HART.

    Good daughter, take his hand—by love alone
    God binds us to Himself and to the hearth
    And shuts us from the waste beyond His peace,
    From maddening freedom and bewildering light.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Would that the world were mine to give it you
    With every quiet hearth and barren waste,
    The maddening freedom of its woods and tides,
    And the bewildering light upon its hills.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Then I would take and break it in my hands
    To see you smile watching it crumble away.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Then I would mould a world of fire and dew
    With no one bitter, grave, or over-wise,
    And nothing marred or old to do you wrong;
    And crowd the enraptured quiet of the sky
    With candles burning to your lonely face.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Your looks are all the candles that I need.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Once a fly dancing in a beam of the sun,
    Or the light wind blowing out of the dawn,
    Could fill your heart with dreams none other knew,
    But now the indissoluble sacrament
    Has mixed your heart that was most proud and cold
    With my warm heart for ever; and sun and moon
    Must fade and heaven be rolled up like a scroll;
    But your white spirit still walk by my spirit.

    [_A VOICE sings in the distance._

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Did you hear something call? O, guard me close,
    Because I have said wicked things to-night;
    And seen a pale-faced child with red-gold hair,
    And longed to dance upon the winds with her.

A VOICE [_close to the door_].

    _The wind blows out of the gates of the day,
    The wind blows over the lonely of heart,
    And the lonely of heart is withered away,
    While the faeries dance in a place apart,
    Shaking their milk-white feet in a ring,
    Tossing their milk-white arms in the air;
    For they hear the wind laugh, and murmur and sing
    Of a land where even the old are fair,
    And even the wise are merry of tongue;
    But I heard a reed of Coolaney say,
    ‘When the wind has laughed and murmured and sung,
    The lonely of heart is withered away!’_

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    I am right happy, and would make all else
    Be happy too. I hear a child outside,
    And will go bring her in out of the cold.

    [_He opens the door. A CHILD dressed in pale green and
    with red-gold hair comes into the house._

THE CHILD.

    I tire of winds and waters and pale lights!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    You are most welcome. It is cold out there;
    Who’d think to face such cold on a May Eve?

THE CHILD.

    And when I tire of this warm little house
    There is one here who must away, away,
    To where the woods, the stars, and the white streams
    Are holding a continual festival.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    O listen to her dreamy and strange talk.
    Come to the fire.

THE CHILD.

                    I will sit upon your knee,
    For I have run from where the winds are born,
    And long to rest my feet a little while.

    [_She sits upon his knee._

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    How pretty you are!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Your hair is wet with dew!

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    I will warm your chilly feet.

    [_She takes THE CHILD’S feet in her hands._

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

                             You must have come
    A long, long way, for I have never seen
    Your pretty face, and must be tired and hungry;
    Here is some bread and wine.

THE CHILD.

                     The wine is bitter.
    Old mother, have you no sweet food for me?

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    I have some honey!

    [_She goes into the next room._

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

                     You are a dear child;
    The mother was quite cross before you came.

    [_BRIDGET returns with the honey, and goes to the
    dresser and fills a porringer with milk._

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    She is the child of gentle people; look
    At her white hands and at her pretty dress.
    I have brought you some new milk, but wait awhile,
    And I will put it by the fire to warm,
    For things well fitted for poor folk like us
    Would never please a high-born child like you.

THE CHILD.

    Old mother, my old mother, the green dawn
    Brightens above while you blow up the fire;
    And evening finds you spreading the white cloth.
    The young may lie in bed and dream and hope,
    But you work on because your heart is old.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    The young are idle.

THE CHILD.

                       Old father, you are wise,
    And all the years have gathered in your heart
    To whisper of the wonders that are gone.
    The young must sigh through many a dream and hope,
    But you are wise because your heart is old.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    O, who would think to find so young a child
    Loving old age and wisdom?

    [_BRIDGET gives her more bread and honey._

THE CHILD.

    No more, mother.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    What a small bite! The milk is ready now;
    What a small sip!

THE CHILD.

                    Put on my shoes, old mother,
    For I would like to dance now I have eaten.
    The reeds are dancing by Coolaney lake,
    And I would like to dance until the reeds
    And the white waves have danced themselves to sleep.

    [_BRIDGET having put on her shoes, she gets off the old
    man’s knees and is about to dance, but suddenly sees
    the crucifix and shrieks and covers her eyes._]

    What is that ugly thing on the black cross?

FATHER HART.

    You cannot know how naughty your words are!
    That is our Blessed Lord!

THE CHILD.

    Hide it away!

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    I have begun to be afraid, again!

THE CHILD.

    Hide it away!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    That would be wickedness!

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    That would be sacrilege!

THE CHILD.

                            The tortured thing!
    Hide it away!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    Her parents are to blame.

FATHER HART.

    That is the image of the Son of God.

    [_THE CHILD puts her arm round his neck and kisses him._

THE CHILD.

    Hide it away! Hide it away!

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    No! no!

FATHER HART.

    Because you are so young and little a child
    I will go take it down.

THE CHILD.

                          Hide it away,
    And cover it out of sight and out of mind.

    [_FATHER HART takes it down and carries it towards the
    inner room._

FATHER HART.

    Since you have come into this barony,
    I will instruct you in our blessed faith:
    Being a clever child, you will soon learn.
    [_To the others._] We must be tender with all budding things.
    Our Maker let no thought of Calvary
    Trouble the morning stars in their first song.

    [_Puts the crucifix in the inner room._

THE CHILD.

    Here is level ground for dancing. I will dance.
    The wind is blowing on the waving reeds,
    The wind is blowing on the heart of man.

    [_She dances, swaying about like the reeds._

MAIRE [_to SHAWN BRUIN_].

    Just now when she came near I thought I heard
    Other small steps beating upon the floor,
    And a faint music blowing in the wind,
    Invisible pipes giving her feet the time.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    I heard no step but hers.

MAIRE BRUIN.

                           Look to the bolt!
    Because the unholy powers are abroad.

MAURTEEN BRUIN [_to THE CHILD_].

    Come over here, and if you promise me
    Not to talk wickedly of holy things
    I will give you something.

THE CHILD.

    Bring it me, old father!

    [_MAURTEEN BRUIN goes into the next room._

FATHER HART.

    I will have queen cakes when you come to me!

    [_MAURTEEN BRUIN returns and lays a piece of money on
    the table. THE CHILD makes a gesture of refusal._

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    It will buy lots of toys; see how it glitters!

THE CHILD.

    Come, tell me, do you love me?

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    I love you!

THE CHILD.

    Ah, but you love this fireside!

FATHER HART.

    I love you.

THE CHILD.

    But you love Him above.

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    She is blaspheming.

THE CHILD [_to MAIRE_].

    And do you love me?

MAIRE BRUIN.

    I—I do not know.

THE CHILD.

    You love that great tall fellow over there:
    Yet I could make you ride upon the winds,
    Run on the top of the dishevelled tide,
    And dance upon the mountains like a flame!

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Queen of the Angels and kind Saints, defend us!
    Some dreadful fate has fallen: a while ago
    The wind cried out and took the primroses,
    And she ran by me laughing in the wind,
    And I gave milk and fire, and she came in
    And made you hide the blessed crucifix.

FATHER HART.

    You fear because of her wild, pretty prattle;
    She knows no better.
    [_To THE CHILD_] Child, how old are you?

THE CHILD.

    When winter sleep is abroad my hair grows thin,
    My feet unsteady. When the leaves awaken
    My mother carries me in her golden arms.
    I’ll soon put on my womanhood and marry
    The spirits of wood and water, but who can tell
    When I was born for the first time? I think
    I am much older than the eagle cock
    That blinks and blinks on Ballygawley Hill,
    And he is the oldest thing under the moon.

FATHER HART.

    She is of the faery people.

THE CHILD.

                             I am Brig’s daughter.
    I sent my messengers for milk and fire,
    And then I heard one call to me and came.

    [_They all except MAIRE BRUIN gather about the priest
    for protection. MAIRE BRUIN stays on the settle in a
    stupor of terror. THE CHILD takes primroses from the
    great bowl and begins to strew them between herself and
    the priest and about MAIRE BRUIN. During the following
    dialogue SHAWN BRUIN goes more than once to the brink
    of the primroses, but shrinks back to the others
    timidly._

FATHER HART.

    I will confront this mighty spirit alone.

    [_They cling to him and hold him back._

THE CHILD [_while she strews the primroses_].

    No one whose heart is heavy with human tears
    Can cross these little cressets of the wood.

FATHER HART.

    Be not afraid, the Father is with us,
    And all the nine angelic hierarchies,
    The Holy Martyrs and the Innocents,
    The adoring Magi in their coats of mail,
    And He who died and rose on the third day,
    And Mary with her seven times wounded heart.

    [_THE CHILD ceases strewing the primroses, and kneels
    upon the settle beside MAIRE and puts her arms about
    her neck._]

    Cry, daughter, to the Angels and the Saints.

THE CHILD.

    You shall go with me, newly-married bride,
    And gaze upon a merrier multitude;
    White-armed Nuala and Aengus of the birds,
    And Feacra of the hurtling foam, and him
    Who is the ruler of the western host,
    Finvarra, and their Land of Heart’s Desire,
    Where beauty has no ebb, decay no flood,
    But joy is wisdom, Time an endless song.
    I kiss you and the world begins to fade.

FATHER HART.

    Daughter, I call you unto home and love!

THE CHILD.

    Stay, and come with me, newly-married bride,
    For, if you hear him, you grow like the rest:
    Bear children, cook, be mindful of the churn,
    And wrangle over butter, fowl, and eggs,
    And sit at last there, old and bitter of tongue,
    Watching the white stars war upon your hopes.

FATHER HART.

    Daughter, I point you out the way to heaven.

THE CHILD.

    But I can lead you, newly-married bride,
    Where nobody gets old and crafty and wise,
    Where nobody gets old and godly and grave,
    Where nobody gets old and bitter of tongue,
    And where kind tongues bring no captivity,
    For we are only true to the far lights
    We follow singing, over valley and hill.

FATHER HART.

    By the dear name of the One crucified,
    I bid you, Maire Bruin, come to me.

THE CHILD.

    I keep you in the name of your own heart!

    [_She leaves the settle, and stooping takes up a mass
    of primroses and kisses them._]

    We have great power to-night, dear golden folk,
    For he took down and hid the crucifix.
    And my invisible brethren fill the house;
    I hear their footsteps going up and down.
    O, they shall soon rule all the hearts of men
    And own all lands; last night they merrily danced
    About his chapel belfry! [_To MAIRE_] Come away,
    I hear my brethren bidding us away!

FATHER HART.

    I will go fetch the crucifix again.

    [_They hang about him in terror and prevent him from
    moving._

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    The enchanted flowers will kill us if you go.

MAURTEEN BRUIN.

    They turn the flowers to little twisted flames.

SHAWN BRUIN.

    The little twisted flames burn up the heart.

THE CHILD.

    I hear them crying, ‘Newly-married bride,
    Come to the woods and waters and pale lights.’

MAIRE BRUIN.

    I will go with you.

FATHER HART.

    She is lost, alas!

THE CHILD [_standing by the door_].

    Then, follow: but the heavy body of clay
    And clinging mortal hope must fall from you,
    For we who ride the winds, run on the waves,
    And dance upon the mountains, are more light
    Than dewdrops on the banners of the dawn.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Then take my soul.      [_SHAWN BRUIN goes over to her._

SHAWN BRUIN.

                    Beloved, do not leave me!
    Remember when I met you by the well
    And took your hand in mine and spoke of love.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    Dear face! Dear voice!

THE CHILD.

    Come, newly-married bride!

MAIRE BRUIN.

    I always loved her world—and yet—and yet—

    [_Sinks into his arms._

THE CHILD [_from the door_].

    White bird, white bird, come with me, little bird.

MAIRE BRUIN.

    She calls my soul!

THE CHILD.

    Come with me, little bird!

MAIRE BRUIN.

    I can hear songs and dancing!

SHAWN BRUIN.

    Stay with me!

MAIRE BRUIN.

    I think that I would stay—and yet—and yet—

THE CHILD.

    Come, little bird with crest of gold!

MAIRE BRUIN [_very softly_].

    And yet—

THE CHILD.

    Come, little bird with silver feet!

    [_MAIRE dies, and THE CHILD goes._

SHAWN BRUIN.

    She is dead!

BRIDGET BRUIN.

    Come from that image there: she is far away:
    You have thrown your arms about a drift of leaves
    Or bole of an ash-tree changed into her image.

FATHER HART.

    Thus do the spirits of evil snatch their prey
    Almost out of the very hand of God;
    And day by day their power is more and more,
    And men and women leave old paths, for pride
    Comes knocking with thin knuckles on the heart.

A VOICE [_singing outside_].

    _The wind blows out of the gates of the day,
    The wind blows over the lonely of heart,
    And the lonely of heart is withered away
    While the faeries dance in a place apart,
    Shaking their milk-white feet in a ring,
    Tossing their milk-white arms in the air;
    For they hear the wind laugh, and murmur and sing
    Of a land where even the old are fair,
    And even the wise are merry of tongue;
    But I heard a reed of Coolaney say,
    ‘When the wind has laughed and murmured and sung,
    The lonely of heart is withered away.’_

    [_The song is taken up by many voices, who sing loudly,
    as if in triumph. Some of the voices seem to come from
    within the house._]
﻿THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    FATHER JOHN
    THOMAS HEARNE, _a coachbuilder_
    ANDREW HEARNE, _his brother_
    MARTIN HEARNE, _his nephew_
    JOHNNY BACACH }
    PAUDEEN       } _beggars_
    BIDDY LALLY   }
    NANNY         }




THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS




ACT I.


    _Interior of a coachbuilder’s workshop. Parts of a
    gilded coach, among them an ornament representing a
    lion and unicorn. THOMAS working at a wheel. FATHER
    JOHN coming from door of inner room._

FATHER JOHN.

I have prayed over Martin. I have prayed a long time, but there is no
move in him yet.

THOMAS.

You are giving yourself too much trouble, Father. It’s as good for you
to leave him alone till the doctor’s bottle will come. If there is any
cure at all for what is on him, it is likely the doctor will have it.

FATHER JOHN.

I think it is not doctor’s medicine will help him in this case.

THOMAS.

It will, it will. The doctor has his business learned well. If Andrew
had gone to him the time I bade him and had not turned again to bring
yourself to the house, it is likely Martin would be walking at this
time. I am loth to trouble you, Father, when the business is not of
your own sort. Any doctor at all should be able and well able to cure
the falling sickness.

FATHER JOHN.

It is not any common sickness that is on him now.

THOMAS.

I thought at the first it was gone to sleep he was. But when shaking
him and roaring at him failed to rouse him, I knew well it was the
falling sickness. Believe me, the doctor will reach it with his drugs.

FATHER JOHN.

Nothing but prayer can reach a soul that is so far beyond the world as
his soul is at this moment.

THOMAS.

You are not saying that the life is gone out of him!

FATHER JOHN.

No, no, his life is in no danger. But where he himself, the spirit, the
soul, is gone, I cannot say. It has gone beyond our imaginings. He is
fallen into a trance.

THOMAS.

He used to be queer as a child, going asleep in the fields, and coming
back with talk of white horses he saw, and bright people like angels or
whatever they were. But I mended that. I taught him to recognise stones
beyond angels with a few strokes of a rod. I would never give in to
visions or to trances.

FATHER JOHN.

We who hold the faith have no right to speak against trance or vision.
Saint Elizabeth had them, Saint Benedict, Saint Anthony, Saint
Columcille. Saint Catherine of Siena often lay a long time as if dead.

THOMAS.

That might be so in the olden time, but those things are gone out
of the world now. Those that do their work fair and honest have no
occasion to let the mind go rambling. What would send my nephew, Martin
Hearne, into a trance, supposing trances to be in it, and he rubbing
the gold on the lion and unicorn that he had taken in hand to make a
good job of for the top of the coach?

FATHER JOHN [_taking up ornament_].

It is likely it was that sent him off. The flashing of light upon
it would be enough to throw one that had a disposition to it into a
trance. There was a very saintly man, though he was not of our church;
he wrote a great book called _Mysterium Magnum_ was seven days in
a trance. Truth, or whatever truth he found, fell upon him like a
bursting shower, and he a poor tradesman at his work. It was a ray of
sunlight on a pewter vessel that was the beginning of all. [_Goes to
the door and looks in._] There is no stir in him yet. It is either the
best thing or the worst thing can happen to anyone, that is happening
to him now.

THOMAS.

And what in the living world can happen to a man that is asleep on his
bed?

FATHER JOHN.

There are some would answer you that it is to those who are awake that
nothing happens, and it is they that know nothing. He is gone where all
have gone for supreme truth.

THOMAS.

    [_Sitting down again and taking up tools._]

Well, maybe so. But work must go on and coachbuilding must go on,
and they will not go on the time there is too much attention given
to dreams. A dream is a sort of a shadow, no profit in it to anyone
at all. A coach, now, is a real thing and a thing that will last for
generations and be made use of to the last, and maybe turn to be a
hen-roost at its latter end.

FATHER JOHN.

I think Andrew told me it was a dream of Martin’s that led to the
making of that coach.

THOMAS.

Well, I believe he saw gold in some dream, and it led him to want to
make some golden thing, and coaches being the handiest, nothing would
do him till he put the most of his fortune into the making of this
golden coach. It turned out better than I thought, for some of the
lawyers came looking at it at Assize time, and through them it was
heard of at Dublin Castle ... and who now has it ordered but the Lord
Lieutenant! [_FATHER JOHN nods._] Ready it must be and sent off it must
be by the end of the month. It is likely King George will be visiting
Dublin, and it is he himself will be sitting in it yet.

FATHER JOHN.

Martin has been working hard at it, I know.

THOMAS.

You never saw a man work the way he did, day and night, near ever since
the time six months ago he first came home from France.

FATHER JOHN.

I never thought he would be so good at a trade. I thought his mind was
only set on books.

THOMAS.

He should be thankful to myself for that. Any person I will take in
hand, I make a clean job of them the same as I would make of any other
thing in my yard—coach, half-coach, hackney-coach, ass-car, common-car,
post-chaise, calash, chariot on two wheels, on four wheels. Each one
has the shape Thomas Hearne put on it, and it in his hands; and what I
can do with wood and iron, why would I not be able to do it with flesh
and blood, and it in a way my own?

FATHER JOHN.

Indeed, I know you did your best for Martin.

THOMAS.

Every best. Checked him, taught him the trade, sent him to the
monastery in France for to learn the language and to see the wide
world; but who should know that if you did not know it, Father John,
and I doing it according to your own advice?

FATHER JOHN.

I thought his nature needed spiritual guidance and teaching, the best
that could be found.

THOMAS.

I thought myself it was best for him to be away for a while. There are
too many wild lads about this place. He to have stopped here, he might
have taken some fancies, and got into some trouble, going against the
Government maybe the same as Johnny Gibbons that is at this time an
outlaw, having a price upon his head.

FATHER JOHN.

That is so. That imagination of his might have taken fire here at home.
It was better putting him with the Brothers, to turn it to imaginings
of heaven.

THOMAS.

Well, I will soon have a good hardy tradesman made of him now that will
live quiet and rear a family, and be maybe appointed coachbuilder to
the Royal Family at the last.

FATHER JOHN [_at window_].

I see your brother Andrew coming back from the doctor; he is stopping
to talk with a troop of beggars that are sitting by the side of the
road.

THOMAS.

There, now, is another that I have shaped. Andrew used to be a bit wild
in his talk and in his ways, wanting to go rambling, not content to
settle in the place where he was reared. But I kept a guard over him;
I watched the time poverty gave him a nip, and then I settled him into
the business. He never was so good a worker as Martin, he is too fond
of wasting his time talking vanities. But he is middling handy, and
he is always steady and civil to customers. I have no complaint worth
while to be making this last twenty years against Andrew.

[_ANDREW comes in._]

ANDREW.

Beggars there outside going the road to the Kinvara fair. They were
saying there is news that Johnny Gibbons is coming back from France on
the quiet; the king’s soldiers are watching the ports for him.

THOMAS.

Let you keep now, Andrew, to the business you have in hand. Will the
doctor be coming himself or did he send a bottle that will cure Martin?

ANDREW.

The doctor can’t come, for he’s down with the lumbago in the back. He
questioned me as to what ailed Martin, and he got a book to go looking
for a cure, and he began telling me things out of it, but I said I
could not be carrying things of that sort in my head. He gave me the
book then, and he has marks put in it for the places where the cures
are ... wait now.... [_Reads_] ‘Compound medicines are usually taken
inwardly, or outwardly applied; inwardly taken, they should be either
liquid or solid; outwardly, they should be fomentations or sponges wet
in some decoctions.’

THOMAS.

He had a right to have written it out himself upon a paper. Where is
the use of all that?

ANDREW.

I think I moved the mark maybe ... here, now, is the part he was
reading to me himself.... ‘The remedies for diseases belonging to the
skins next the brain, headache, vertigo, cramp, convulsions, palsy,
incubus, apoplexy, falling sickness.’

THOMAS.

It is what I bid you to tell him that it was the falling sickness.

ANDREW [_dropping book_].

O, my dear, look at all the marks gone out of it! Wait, now, I partly
remember what he said ... a blister he spoke of ... or to be smelling
hartshorn ... or the sneezing powder ... or if all fails, to try
letting the blood.

FATHER JOHN.

All this has nothing to do with the real case. It is all waste of time.

ANDREW.

That is what I was thinking myself, Father. Sure it was I was the first
to call out to you when I saw you coming down from the hill-side, and
to bring you in to see what could you do. I would have more trust in
your means than in any doctor’s learning. And in case you might fail
to cure him, I have a cure myself I heard from my grandmother—God rest
her soul!—and she told me she never knew it to fail. A person to have
the falling sickness, to cut the top of his nails and a small share of
the hair of his head, and to put it down on the floor, and to take a
harry-pin and drive it down with that into the floor and to leave it
there. ‘That is the cure will never fail,’ she said, ‘to rise up any
person at all having the falling sickness.’

FATHER JOHN [_hand on ear_].

I will go back to the hill-side, I will go back to the hill-side; but
no, no, I must do what I can. I will go again, I will wrestle, I will
strive my best to call him back with prayer.

    [_Goes in and shuts door._

ANDREW.

It is queer Father John is sometimes, and very queer. There are times
when you would say that he believes in nothing at all.

THOMAS.

If you wanted a priest, why did you not get our own parish priest that
is a sensible man, and a man that you would know what his thoughts are?
You know well the bishop should have something against Father John to
have left him through the years in that poor mountainy place, minding
the few unfortunate people that were left out of the last famine. A man
of his learning to be going in rags the way he is, there must be some
good cause for that.

ANDREW.

I had all that in mind and I bringing him. But I thought he would have
done more for Martin than what he is doing. To read a Mass over him
I thought he would, and to be convulsed in the reading it, and some
strange thing to have gone out with a great noise through the doorway.

THOMAS.

It would give no good name to the place such a thing to be happening in
it. It is well enough for labouring-men and for half-acre men. It would
be no credit at all such a thing to be heard of in this house, that is
for coachbuilding the capital of the county.

ANDREW.

If it is from the devil this sickness comes, it would be best to put it
out whatever way it would be put out. But there might no bad thing be
on the lad at all. It is likely he was with wild companions abroad, and
that knocking about might have shaken his health. I was that way myself
one time.

THOMAS.

Father John said that it was some sort of a vision or a trance, but I
would give no heed to what he would say. It is his trade to see more
than other people would see, the same as I myself might be seeing a
split in a leather car hood that no other person would find out at all.

ANDREW.

If it is the falling sickness is on him, I have no objection to
that—a plain, straight sickness that was cast as a punishment on the
unbelieving Jews. It is a thing that might attack one of a family, and
one of another family, and not to come upon their kindred at all. A
person to have it, all you have to do is not to go between him and the
wind, or fire, or water. But I am in dread trance is a thing might run
through the house the same as the cholera morbus.

THOMAS.

In my belief there is no such thing as a trance. Letting on people do
be to make the world wonder the time they think well to rise up. To
keep them to their work is best, and not to pay much attention to them
at all.

ANDREW.

I would not like trances to be coming on myself. I leave it in my will
if I die without cause, a holly-stake to be run through my heart the
way I will lie easy after burial, and not turn my face downwards in my
coffin. I tell you I leave it on you in my will.

THOMAS.

Leave thinking of your own comforts, Andrew, and give your mind to the
business. Did the smith put the irons yet on to the shafts of this
coach?

ANDREW.

I will go see did he.

THOMAS.

Do so, and see did he make a good job of it. Let the shafts be sound
and solid if they are to be studded with gold.

ANDREW.

They are, and the steps along with them—glass sides for the people to
be looking in at the grandeur of the satin within—the lion and the
unicorn crowning all. It was a great thought Martin had the time he
thought of making this coach!

THOMAS.

It is best for me to go see the smith myself and leave it to no other
one. You can be attending to that ass-car out in the yard wants a new
tyre in the wheel—out in the rear of the yard it is. [_They go to
door._] To pay attention to every small thing, and to fill up every
minute of time shaping whatever you have to do, that is the way to
build up a business.

    [_They go out._

FATHER JOHN [_bringing in MARTIN_].

They are gone out now—the air is fresher here in the workshop—you can
sit here for a while. You are now fully awake, you have been in some
sort of a trance or a sleep.

MARTIN.

Who was it that pulled at me? Who brought me back?

FATHER JOHN.

It is I, Father John, did it. I prayed a long time over you and brought
you back.

MARTIN.

You, Father John, to be so unkind! O leave me, leave me alone!

FATHER JOHN.

You are in your dream still.

MARTIN.

It was no dream, it was real. Do you not smell the broken fruit—the
grapes? the room is full of the smell.

FATHER JOHN.

Tell me what you have seen, where you have been?

MARTIN.

There were horses—white horses rushing by, with white shining
riders—there was a horse without a rider, and someone caught me up and
put me upon him and we rode away, with the wind, like the wind—

FATHER JOHN.

That is a common imagining. I know many poor persons have seen that.

MARTIN.

We went on, on, on. We came to a sweet-smelling garden with a gate
to it, and there were wheatfields in full ear around, and there were
vineyards like I saw in France, and the grapes in bunches. I thought
it to be one of the townlands of heaven. Then I saw the horses we were
on had changed to unicorns, and they began trampling the grapes and
breaking them. I tried to stop them but I could not.

FATHER JOHN.

That is strange, that is strange. What is it that brings to mind? I
heard it in some place, _monoceros de astris_, the unicorn from the
stars.

MARTIN.

They tore down the wheat and trampled it on stones, and then they tore
down what were left of grapes and crushed and bruised and trampled
them. I smelt the wine, it was flowing on every side—then everything
grew vague. I cannot remember clearly, everything was silent; the
trampling now stopped, we were all waiting for some command. Oh! was it
given! I was trying to hear it; there was someone dragging, dragging me
away from that. I am sure there was a command given, and there was a
great burst of laughter. What was it? What was the command? Everything
seemed to tremble round me.

FATHER JOHN.

Did you awake then?

MARTIN.

I do not think I did, it all changed—it was terrible, wonderful! I saw
the unicorns trampling, trampling, but not in the wine troughs. Oh, I
forget! Why did you waken me?

FATHER JOHN.

I did not touch you. Who knows what hands pulled you away? I prayed,
that was all I did. I prayed very hard that you might awake. If I had
not, you might have died. I wonder what it all meant? The unicorns—what
did the French monk tell me?—strength they meant, virginal strength, a
rushing, lasting, tireless strength.

MARTIN.

They were strong. Oh, they made a great noise with their trampling.

FATHER JOHN.

And the grapes, what did they mean? It puts me in mind of the psalm,
_Et calix meus inebrians quam præclarus est_. It was a strange vision,
a very strange vision, a very strange vision.

MARTIN.

How can I get back to that place?

FATHER JOHN.

You must not go back, you must not think of doing that. That life of
vision, of contemplation, is a terrible life, for it has far more of
temptation in it than the common life. Perhaps it would have been best
for you to stay under rules in the monastery.

MARTIN.

I could not see anything so clearly there. It is back here in my own
place the visions come, in the place where shining people used to laugh
around me, and I a little lad in a bib.

FATHER JOHN.

You cannot know but it was from the Prince of this world the vision
came. How can one ever know unless one follows the discipline of the
Church? Some spiritual director, some wise learned man, that is what
you want. I do not know enough. What am I but a poor banished priest,
with my learning forgotten, my books never handled and spotted with the
damp!

MARTIN.

I will go out into the fields where you cannot come to me to awake me.
I will see that townland again; I will hear that command. I cannot
wait, I must know what happened, I must bring that command to mind
again.

FATHER JOHN.

    [_Putting himself between MARTIN and the door._]

You must have patience as the saints had it. You are taking your own
way. If there is a command from God for you, you must wait His good
time to receive it.

MARTIN.

Must I live here forty years, fifty years ... to grow as old as my
uncles, seeing nothing but common things, doing work ... some foolish
work?

FATHER JOHN.

Here they are coming; it is time for me to go. I must think and I must
pray. My mind is troubled about you. [_To THOMAS as he and ANDREW come
in._] Here he is; be very kind to him for he has still the weakness of
a little child. [_Goes out._

THOMAS.

Are you well of the fit, lad?

MARTIN.

It was no fit. I was away—for awhile—no, you will not believe me if I
tell you.

ANDREW.

I would believe it, Martin. I used to have very long sleeps myself and
very queer dreams.

THOMAS.

You had, till I cured you, taking you in hand and binding you to the
hours of the clock. The cure that will cure yourself, Martin, and will
waken you, is to put the whole of your mind on to your golden coach; to
take it in hand and to finish it out of face.

MARTIN.

Not just now. I want to think—to try and remember what I saw, something
that I heard, that I was told to do.

THOMAS.

No, but put it out of your mind. There is no man doing business that
can keep two things in his head. A Sunday or a holy-day, now, you might
go see a good hurling or a thing of the kind, but to be spreading out
your mind on anything outside of the workshop on common days, all
coachbuilding would come to an end.

MARTIN.

I don’t think it is building I want to do. I don’t think that is what
was in the command.

THOMAS.

It is too late to be saying that, the time you have put the most of
your fortune in the business. Set yourself now to finish your job, and
when it is ended maybe I won’t begrudge you going with the coach as far
as Dublin.

ANDREW.

That is it, that will satisfy him. I had a great desire myself, and
I young, to go travelling the roads as far as Dublin. The roads are
the great things, they never come to an end. They are the same as the
serpent having his tail swallowed in his own mouth.

MARTIN.

It was not wandering I was called to. What was it? what was it?

THOMAS.

What you are called to, and what everyone having no great estate is
called to, is to work. Sure the world itself could not go on without
work.

MARTIN.

I wonder if that is the great thing, to make the world go on? No, I
don’t think that is the great thing—what does the Munster poet call
it?—‘this crowded slippery coach-loving world.’ I don’t think I was
told to work for that.

ANDREW.

I often thought that myself. It is a pity the stock of the Hearnes to
be asked to do any work at all.

THOMAS.

Rouse yourself, Martin, and don’t be talking the way a fool talks. You
started making that golden coach, and you were set upon it, and you had
me tormented about it. You have yourself wore out working at it, and
planning it, and thinking of it, and at the end of the race, when you
have the winning-post in sight, and horses hired for to bring it to
Dublin Castle, you go falling into sleeps and blathering about dreams,
and we run to a great danger of letting the profit and the sale go by.
Sit down on the bench now, and lay your hands to the work.

MARTIN [_sitting down_].

I will try. I wonder why I ever wanted to make it; it was no good dream
set me doing that. [_He takes up wheel._] What is there in a wooden
wheel to take pleasure in it? Gilding it outside makes it no different.

THOMAS.

That is right, now. You had some good plan for making the axle run
smooth.

MARTIN.

    [_Letting wheel fall and putting his hands to his
    head._]

It is no use. [_Angrily._] Why did you send the priest to awake me? My
soul is my own and my mind is my own. I will send them to where I like.
You have no authority over my thoughts.

THOMAS.

That is no way to be speaking to me. I am head of this business.
Nephew, or no nephew, I will have no one come cold or unwilling to the
work.

MARTIN.

I had better go; I am of no use to you. I am going—I must be alone—I
will forget if I am not alone. Give me what is left of my money and I
will go out of this.

THOMAS.

    [_Opening a press and taking out a bag and throwing it
    to him._]

There is what is left of your money! The rest of it you have spent on
the coach. If you want to go, go, and I will not have to be annoyed
with you from this out.

ANDREW.

Come now with me, Thomas. The boy is foolish, but it will soon pass
over. He has not my sense to be giving attention to what you will say.
Come along now, leave him for awhile; leave him to me I say, it is I
will get inside his mind.

    [_He leads THOMAS out. MARTIN bangs door angrily after
    them and sits down, taking up lion and unicorn._

MARTIN.

I think it was some shining thing I saw. What was it?

ANDREW.

    [_Opening door and putting in his head._]

Listen to me, Martin.

MARTIN.

Go away, no more talking; leave me alone.

ANDREW.

O, but wait. I understand you. Thomas doesn’t understand your thoughts,
but I understand them. Wasn’t I telling you I was just like you once?

MARTIN.

Like me? Did you ever see the other things, the things beyond?

ANDREW.

I did. It is not the four walls of the house keep me content. Thomas
doesn’t know. Oh, no, he doesn’t know.

MARTIN.

No, he has no vision.

ANDREW.

He has not, nor any sort of a heart for a frolic.

MARTIN.

He has never heard the laughter and the music beyond.

ANDREW.

He has not, nor the music of my own little flute. I have it hidden in
the thatch outside.

MARTIN.

Does the body slip from you as it does from me? They have not shut your
window into eternity?

ANDREW.

Thomas never shut a window I could not get through. I knew you were one
of my own sort. When I am sluggish in the morning, Thomas says, ‘Poor
Andrew is getting old.’ That is all he knows. The way to keep young is
to do the things youngsters do. Twenty years I have been slipping away,
and he never found me out yet!

MARTIN.

That is what they call ecstasy, but there is no word that can tell out
very plain what it means. That freeing of the mind from its thoughts,
those wonders we know when we put them into words; the words seem as
little like them as blackberries are like the moon and sun.

ANDREW.

I found that myself the time they knew me to be wild, and used to be
asking me to say what pleasure did I find in cards, and women, and
drink.

MARTIN.

You might help me to remember that vision I had this morning, to
understand it. The memory of it has slipped from me. Wait, it is coming
back, little by little. I know that I saw the unicorns trampling, and
then a figure, a many-changing figure, holding some bright thing.
I knew something was going to happen or to be said, something that
would make my whole life strong and beautiful like the rushing of the
unicorns, and then, and then—

JOHNNY BACACH’S _voice at window_.

A poor person I am, without food, without a way, without portion,
without costs, without a person or a stranger, without means, without
hope, without health, without warmth—

ANDREW [_looking towards window_].

It is that troop of beggars. Bringing their tricks and their thieveries
they are to the Kinvara Fair.

MARTIN [_impatiently_].

There is no quiet—come to the other room. I am trying to remember.

    [_They go to door of inner room, but ANDREW stops him._

ANDREW.

They are a bad-looking fleet. I have a mind to drive them away, giving
them a charity.

MARTIN.

Drive them away or come away from their voices.

ANOTHER VOICE.

I put under the power of my prayer

    All that will give me help.
    Rafael keep him Wednesday,
    Sachiel feed him Thursday,
    Hamiel provide him Friday,
    Cassiel increase him Saturday.

Sure giving to us is giving to the Lord and laying up a store in the
treasury of heaven.

ANDREW.

Whisht! He is entering by the window!

    [_JOHNNY climbs up._

JOHNNY.

That I may never sin, but the place is empty.

PAUDEEN.

Go in and see what can you make a grab at.

JOHNNY [_getting in_].

That every blessing I gave may be turned to a curse on them that left
the place so bare! [_He turns things over._] I might chance something
in this chest if it was open.

    [_ANDREW begins creeping towards him._

NANNY [_outside_].

Hurry on, now, you limping crabfish you! We can’t be stopping here
while you’ll boil stirabout!

JOHNNY.

    [_Seizing bag of money and holding it up high in both
    hands._]

Look at this, now, look!

    [_ANDREW comes behind, seizes his arm._

JOHNNY [_letting bag fall with a crash_].

Destruction on us all!

MARTIN.

    [_Running forward, seizes him. Heads disappear._]

That is it! O, I remember. That is what happened. That is the command.
Who was it sent you here with that command?

JOHNNY.

It was misery sent me in, and starvation, and the hard ways of the
world.

NANNY [_outside_].

It was that, my poor child, and my one son only. Show mercy to him now
and he after leaving gaol this morning.

MARTIN [_to ANDREW_].

I was trying to remember it—when he spoke that word it all came back to
me. I saw a bright many-changing figure; it was holding up a shining
vessel [_holds up arms_]; then the vessel fell and was broken with a
great crash; then I saw the unicorns trampling it. They were breaking
the world to pieces—when I saw the cracks coming I shouted for joy! And
I heard the command ‘Destroy, destroy, destruction is the life-giver!
destroy!’

ANDREW.

What will we do with him? He was thinking to rob you of your gold.

MARTIN.

How could I forget it or mistake it? It has all come upon me now; the
reasons of it all, like a flood, like a flooded river.

JOHNNY [_weeping_].

It was the hunger brought me in and the drouth.

MARTIN.

Were you given any other message? Did you see the unicorns?

JOHNNY.

I saw nothing and heard nothing; near dead I am with the fright I got
and with the hardship of the gaol.

MARTIN.

To destroy, to overthrow all that comes between us and God, between
us and that shining country. To break the wall, Andrew, to break the
thing—whatever it is that comes between, but where to begin—

ANDREW.

What is it you are talking about?

MARTIN.

It may be that this man is the beginning. He has been sent—the poor,
they have nothing, and so they can see heaven as we cannot. He and his
comrades will understand me. But how to give all men high hearts that
they may all understand?

JOHNNY.

It’s the juice of the grey barley will do that.

ANDREW.

To rise everybody’s heart, is it? Is it that was your meaning all the
time? If you will take the blame of it all, I’ll do what you want. Give
me the bag of money then. [_He takes it up._] O, I’ve a heart like your
own. I’ll lift the world, too. The people will be running from all
parts. O, it will be a great day in this district.

JOHNNY.

Will I go with you?

MARTIN.

No, you must stay here; we have things to do and to plan.

JOHNNY.

Destroyed we all are with the hunger and the drouth.

MARTIN.

Go, then, get food and drink, whatever is wanted to give you strength
and courage. Gather your people together here, bring them all in. We
have a great thing to do. I have to begin—I want to tell it to the
whole world. Bring them in, bring them in, I will make the house ready.

    [_He stands looking up as if in ecstasy; ANDREW and
    JOHNNY BACACH go out._




ACT II


    _The same workshop. MARTIN seen arranging mugs and
    bread, etc., on a table. FATHER JOHN comes in, knocking
    at open door as he comes; his mind intensely absorbed._

MARTIN.

Come in, come in, I have got the house ready. Here is bread and
meat—everybody is welcome.

    [_Hearing no answer, turns round._

FATHER JOHN.

Martin, I have come back. There is something I want to say to you.

MARTIN.

You are welcome, there are others coming. They are not of your sort,
but all are welcome.

FATHER JOHN.

I have remembered suddenly something that I read when I was in the
seminary.

MARTIN.

You seem very tired.

FATHER JOHN [_sitting down_].

I had almost got back to my own place when I thought of it. I have run
part of the way. It is very important; it is about the trance that you
have been in. When one is inspired from above, either in trance or in
contemplation, one remembers afterwards all that one has seen and read.
I think there must be something about it in St. Thomas. I know that
I have read a long passage about it years ago. But, Martin, there is
another kind of inspiration, or rather an obsession or possession. A
diabolical power comes into one’s body, or overshadows it. Those whose
bodies are taken hold of in this way, jugglers, and witches, and the
like, can often tell what is happening in distant places, or what is
going to happen, but when they come out of that state they remember
nothing. I think you said—

MARTIN.

That I could not remember.

FATHER JOHN.

You remembered something, but not all. Nature is a great sleep; there
are dangerous and evil spirits in her dreams, but God is above Nature.
She is a darkness, but He makes everything clear; He is light.

MARTIN.

All is clear now. I remember all, or all that matters to me. A poor man
brought me a word, and I know what I have to do.

FATHER JOHN.

Ah, I understand, words were put into his mouth. I have read of such
things. God sometimes uses some common man as his messenger.

MARTIN.

You may have passed the man who brought it on the road. He left me but
now.

FATHER JOHN.

Very likely, very likely, that is the way it happened. Some plain,
unnoticed man has sometimes been sent with a command.

MARTIN.

I saw the unicorns trampling in my dream. They were breaking the world.
I am to destroy, destruction was the word the messenger spoke.

FATHER JOHN.

To destroy?

MARTIN.

To bring again the old disturbed exalted life, the old splendour.

FATHER JOHN.

You are not the first that dream has come to. [_Gets up, and walks up
and down._] It has been wandering here and there, calling now to this
man, now to that other. It is a terrible dream.

MARTIN.

Father John, you have had the same thought.

FATHER JOHN.

Men were holy then, there were saints everywhere. There was reverence;
but now it is all work, business, how to live a long time. Ah, if one
could change it all in a minute, even by war and violence! There is
a cell where Saint Ciaran used to pray; if one could bring that time
again!

MARTIN.

Do not deceive me. You have had the command.

FATHER JOHN.

Why are you questioning me? You are asking me things that I have told
to no one but my confessor.

MARTIN.

We must gather the crowds together, you and I.

FATHER JOHN.

I have dreamed your dream, it was long ago. I had your vision.

MARTIN.

And what happened?

FATHER JOHN [_harshly_].

It was stopped; that was an end. I was sent to the lonely parish where
I am, where there was no one I could lead astray. They have left me
there. We must have patience; the world was destroyed by water, it has
yet to be consumed by fire.

MARTIN.

Why should we be patient? To live seventy years, and others to come
after us and live seventy years it may be; and so from age to age, and
all the while the old splendour dying more and more.

    [_A noise of shouting. ANDREW, who has been standing at
    the door, comes in._

ANDREW.

Martin says truth, and he says it well. Planing the side of a cart or
a shaft, is that life? It is not. Sitting at a desk writing letters to
the man that wants a coach, or to the man that won’t pay for the one he
has got, is that life, I ask you? Thomas arguing at you and putting
you down—‘Andrew, dear Andrew, did you put the tyre on that wheel yet?’
Is that life? Not, it is not. I ask you all, what do you remember
when you are dead? It’s the sweet cup in the corner of the widow’s
drinking-house that you remember. Ha, ha, listen to that shouting! That
is what the lads in the village will remember to the last day they live.

MARTIN.

Why are they shouting? What have you told them?

ANDREW.

Never you mind; you left that to me. You bade me to lift their hearts
and I did lift them. There is not one among them but will have his head
like a blazing tar-barrel before morning. What did your friend the
beggar say? The juice of the grey barley, he said.

FATHER JOHN.

You accursed villain! You have made them drunk!

ANDREW.

Not at all, but lifting them to the stars. That is what Martin bade me
to do, and there is no one can say I did not do it.

    [_A shout at door, and beggars push in a barrel. They
    cry, ‘Hi! for the noble master!’ and point at ANDREW._

JOHNNY.

It’s not him, it’s that one! [_Points at MARTIN._

FATHER JOHN.

Are you bringing this devil’s work in at the very door? Go out of this,
I say! get out! Take these others with you!

MARTIN.

No, no; I asked them in, they must not be turned out. They are my
guests.

FATHER JOHN.

Drive them out of your uncle’s house!

MARTIN.

Come, Father, it is better for you to go. Go back to your own place. I
have taken the command. It is better perhaps for you that you did not
take it.

[_FATHER JOHN and MARTIN go out._

BIDDY.

It is well for that old lad he didn’t come between ourselves and our
luck. Himself to be after his meal, and ourselves staggering with the
hunger! It would be right to have flayed him and to have made bags of
his skin.

NANNY.

What a hurry you are in to get your enough! Look at the grease on your
frock yet, with the dint of the dabs you put in your pocket! Doing
cures and foretellings is it? You starved pot-picker, you!

BIDDY.

That you may be put up to-morrow to take the place of that decent son
of yours that had the yard of the gaol wore with walking it till this
morning!

NANNY.

If he had, he had a mother to come to, and he would know her when he
did see her; and that is what no son of your own could do and he to
meet you at the foot of the gallows.

JOHNNY.

If I did know you, I knew too much of you since the first beginning of
my life! What reward did I ever get travelling with you? What store did
you give me of cattle or of goods? What provision did I get from you by
day or by night but your own bad character to be joined on to my own,
and I following at your heels, and your bags tied round about me!

NANNY.

Disgrace and torment on you! Whatever you got from me, it was more
than any reward or any bit I ever got from the father you had, or any
honourable thing at all, but only the hurt and the harm of the world
and its shame!

JOHNNY.

What would he give you, and you going with him without leave! Crooked
and foolish you were always, and you begging by the side of the ditch.

NANNY.

Begging or sharing, the curse of my heart upon you! It’s better off I
was before ever I met with you to my cost! What was on me at all that I
did not cut a scourge in the wood to put manners and decency on you the
time you were not hardened as you are!

JOHNNY.

Leave talking to me of your rods and your scourges! All you taught me
was robbery, and it is on yourself and not on myself the scourges will
be laid at the day of the recognition of tricks.

PAUDEEN.

’Faith, the pair of you together is better than Hector fighting before
Troy!

NANNY.

Ah, let you be quiet. It is not fighting we are craving, but the easing
of the hunger that is on us and of the passion of sleep. Lend me a
graineen of tobacco now till I’ll kindle my pipe—a blast of it will
take the weight of the road off my heart.

    [_ANDREW gives her some, NANNY grabs at it._

BIDDY.

No, but it’s to myself you should give it. I that never smoked a pipe
this forty year without saying the tobacco prayer. Let that one say did
ever she do that much.

NANNY.

That the pain of your front tooth may be in your back tooth, you to be
grabbing my share!

    [_They snap at tobacco._

ANDREW.

Pup, pup, pup! Don’t be snapping and quarrelling now, and you so well
treated in this house. It is strollers like yourselves should be for
frolic and for fun. Have you ne’er a good song to sing, a song that
will rise all our hearts?

PAUDEEN.

Johnny Bacach is a good singer, it is what he used to be doing in the
fairs, if the oakum of the gaol did not give him a hoarseness within
the throat.

ANDREW.

Give it out so, a good song, a song will put courage and spirit into
any man at all.

JOHNNY [_singing_].

    Come, all ye airy bachelors,
      A warning take by me,
    A sergeant caught me fowling,
      And fired his gun so free.

    His comrades came to his relief,
      And I was soon trepanned,
    And bound up like a woodcock
      Had fallen into their hands.

    The judge said transportation,
      The ship was on the strand;
    They have yoked me to the traces
      For to plough Van Dieman’s Land!

ANDREW.

That’s no good of a song but a melancholy sort of a song. I’d as lief
be listening to a saw going through timber. Wait, now, till you will
hear myself giving out a tune on the flute.

    [_Goes out for it._

JOHNNY.

It is what I am thinking there must be a great dearth and a great
scarcity of good comrades in this place, a man like that youngster,
having means in his hand, to be bringing ourselves and our rags into
the house.

PAUDEEN.

You think yourself very wise, Johnny Bacach. Can you tell me, now, who
that man is?

JOHNNY.

Some decent lad, I suppose, with a good way of living and a mind to
send up his name upon the roads.

PAUDEEN.

You that have been gaoled this eight months know little of this
countryside. It isn’t a limping stroller like yourself the Boys would
let come among them. But I know. I went to the drill a few nights and
I skinning kids for the mountainy men. In a quarry beyond the drill
is—they have their plans made—it’s the square house of the Brownes is
to be made an attack on and plundered. Do you know, now, who is the
leader they are waiting for?

JOHNNY.

How would I know that?

PAUDEEN [_singing_].

    Oh, Johnny Gibbons, my five hundred healths to you.
    It is long you are away from us over the sea!

JOHNNY [_standing up excitedly_].

Sure that man could not be Johnny Gibbons that is outlawed!

PAUDEEN.

I asked news of him from the old lad, and I bringing in the drink along
with him. ‘Don’t be asking questions,’ says he; ‘take the treat he
gives you,’ says he. ‘If a lad that has a high heart has a mind to
rouse the neighbours,’ says he, ‘and to stretch out his hand to all
that pass the road, it is in France he learned it,’ says he, ‘the place
he is but lately come from, and where the wine does be standing open in
tubs. Take your treat when you get it,’ says he, ‘and make no delay or
all might be discovered and put an end to.’

JOHNNY.

He came over the sea from France! It is Johnny Gibbons, surely, but it
seems to me they were calling him by some other name.

PAUDEEN.

A man on his keeping might go by a hundred names. Would he be telling
it out to us that he never saw before, and we with that clutch of
chattering women along with us? Here he is coming now. Wait till you
see is he the lad I think him to be.

MARTIN [_coming in_].

I will make my banner, I will paint the unicorn on it. Give me that
bit of canvas, there is paint over here. We will get no help from
the settled men—we will call to the lawbreakers, the tinkers, the
sievemakers, the sheepstealers.

    [_He begins to make banner._

BIDDY.

That sounds to be a queer name of an army. Ribbons I can understand,
Whiteboys, Rightboys, Threshers, and Peep o’ Day, but Unicorns I never
heard of before.

JOHNNY.

It is not a queer name but a very good name. [_Takes up lion and
unicorn._] It is often you saw that before you in the dock. There is
the unicorn with the one horn, and what it is he is going against? The
lion of course. When he has the lion destroyed, the crown must fall
and be shivered. Can’t you see it is the League of the Unicorns is the
league that will fight and destroy the power of England and King George?

PAUDEEN.

It is with that banner we will march and the lads in the quarry with
us, it is they will have the welcome before him! It won’t be long till
we’ll be attacking the Square House! Arms there are in it, riches that
would smother the world, rooms full of guineas we will put wax on our
shoes walking them; the horses themselves shod with no less than silver!

MARTIN [_holding up banner_].

There it is ready! We are very few now, but the army of the Unicorns
will be a great army! [_To JOHNNY._] Why have you brought me the
message? Can you remember any more? Has anything more come to you? You
have been drinking, the clouds upon your mind have been destroyed....
Can you see anything or hear anything that is beyond the world?

JOHNNY.

I can not. I don’t know what do you want me to tell you at all?

MARTIN.

I want to begin the destruction, but I don’t know where to begin ...
you do not hear any other voice?

JOHNNY.

I do not. I have nothing at all to do with Freemasons or witchcraft.

PAUDEEN.

It is Biddy Lally has to do with witchcraft. It is often she threw the
cups and gave out prophecies the same as Columcille.

MARTIN.

You are one of the knowledgeable women. You can tell me where it is
best to begin, and what will happen in the end.

BIDDY.

I will foretell nothing at all. I rose out of it this good while, with
the stiffness and the swelling it brought upon my joints.

MARTIN.

If you have foreknowledge you have no right to keep silent. If you
do not help me I may go to work in the wrong way. I know I have to
destroy, but when I ask myself what I am to begin with, I am full of
uncertainty.

PAUDEEN.

Here now are the cups handy and the leavings in them.

BIDDY.

    [_Taking cups and pouring one from another._]

Throw a bit of white money into the four corners of the house.

MARTIN.

There! [_Throwing it._]

BIDDY.

There can be nothing told without silver. It is not myself will have
the profit of it. Along with that I will be forced to throw out gold.

MARTIN.

There is a guinea for you. Tell me what comes before your eyes.

BIDDY.

What is it you are wanting to have news of?

MARTIN.

Of what I have to go out against at the beginning ... there is so much
... the whole world it may be.

BIDDY.

    [_Throwing from one cup to another and looking._]

You have no care for yourself. You have been across the sea, you are
not long back. You are coming within the best day of your life.

MARTIN.

What is it? What is it I have to do?

BIDDY.

I see a great smoke, I see burning ... there is a great smoke overhead.

MARTIN.

That means we have to burn away a great deal that men have piled up
upon the earth. We must bring men once more to the wildness of the
clean green earth.

BIDDY.

Herbs for my healing, the big herb and the little herb, it is true
enough they get their great strength out of the earth.

JOHNNY.

Who was it the green sod of Ireland belonged to in the olden times?
Wasn’t it to the ancient race it belonged? And who has possession of it
now but the race that came robbing over the sea? The meaning of that
is to destroy the big houses and the towns, and the fields to be given
back to the ancient race.

MARTIN.

That is it. You don’t put it as I do, but what matter? Battle is all.

PAUDEEN.

Columcille said, the four corners to be burned, and then the middle of
the field to be burned. I tell you it was Columcille’s prophecy said
that.

BIDDY.

Iron handcuffs I see and a rope and a gallows, and it maybe is not for
yourself I see it, but for some I have acquaintance with a good way
back.

MARTIN.

That means the law. We must destroy the law. That was the first sin,
the first mouthful of the apple.

JOHNNY.

So it was, so it was. The law is the worst loss. The ancient law was
for the benefit of all. It is the law of the English is the only sin.

MARTIN.

When there were no laws men warred on one another and man to man, not
with machines made in towns as they do now, and they grew hard and
strong in body. They were altogether alive like him that made them in
his image, like people in that unfallen country. But presently they
thought it better to be safe, as if safety mattered or anything but the
exaltation of the heart, and to have eyes that danger had made grave
and piercing. We must overthrow the laws and banish them.

JOHNNY.

It is what I say, to put out the laws is to put out the whole nation of
the English. Laws for themselves they made for their own profit, and
left us nothing at all, no more than a dog or a sow.

BIDDY.

An old priest I see, and I would not say is he the one was here or
another. Vexed and troubled he is, kneeling fretting and ever-fretting
in some lonesome ruined place.

MARTIN.

I thought it would come to that. Yes, the Church too—that is to be
destroyed. Once men fought with their desires and their fears, with all
that they call their sins, unhelped, and their souls became hard and
strong. When we have brought back the clean earth and destroyed the
law and the Church all life will become like a flame of fire, like a
burning eye ... Oh, how to find words for it all ... all that is not
life will pass away.

JOHNNY.

It is Luther’s Church he means, and the humpbacked discourse of Seaghan
Calvin’s Bible. So we will break it, and make an end of it.

MARTIN.

We will go out against the world and break it and unmake it.
[_Rising._] We are the army of the Unicorn from the Stars! We will
trample it to pieces.—We will consume the world, we will burn it
away—Father John said the world has yet to be consumed by fire. Bring
me fire.

ANDREW [_to _Beggars_].

Here is Thomas. Hide—let you hide.

    [_All except MARTIN hurry into next room. THOMAS comes
    in._

THOMAS.

Come with me, Martin. There is terrible work going on in the town!
There is mischief gone abroad. Very strange things are happening!

MARTIN.

What are you talking of? What has happened?

THOMAS.

Come along, I say, it must be put a stop to. We must call to every
decent man. It is as if the devil himself had gone through the town on
a blast and set every drinking-house open!

MARTIN.

I wonder how that has happened. Can it have anything to do with
Andrew’s plan?

THOMAS.

Are you giving no heed to what I’m saying? There is not a man, I tell
you, in the parish and beyond the parish but has left the work he was
doing whether in the field or in the mill.

MARTIN.

Then all work has come to an end? Perhaps that was a good thought of
Andrew’s.

THOMAS.

There is not a man has come to sensible years that is not drunk or
drinking! My own labourers and my own serving-men are sitting on
counters and on barrels! I give you my word, the smell of the spirits
and the porter and the shouting and the cheering within, made the hair
to rise up on my scalp.

MARTIN.

And yet there is not one of them that does not feel that he could
bridle the four winds.

THOMAS [_sitting down in despair_].

You are drunk too. I never thought you had a fancy for it.

MARTIN.

It is hard for you to understand. You have worked all your life. You
have said to yourself every morning, ‘What is to be done to-day?’ and
when you are tired out you have thought of the next day’s work. If you
gave yourself an hour’s idleness, it was but that you might work the
better. Yet it is only when one has put work away that one begins to
live.

THOMAS.

It is those French wines that did it.

MARTIN.

I have been beyond the earth. In Paradise, in that happy townland,
I have seen the shining people. They were all doing one thing or
another, but not one of them was at work. All that they did was but the
overflowing of their idleness, and their days were a dance bred of the
secret frenzy of their hearts, or a battle where the sword made a sound
that was like laughter.

THOMAS.

You went away sober from out of my hands; they had a right to have
minded you better.

MARTIN.

No man can be alive, and what is paradise but fulness of life, if
whatever he sets his hand to in the daylight cannot carry him from
exaltation to exaltation, and if he does not rise into the frenzy of
contemplation in the night silence. Events that are not begotten in joy
are misbegotten and darken the world, and nothing is begotten in joy if
the joy of a thousand years has not been crushed into a moment.

THOMAS.

And I offered to let you go to Dublin in the coach!

MARTIN [_giving banner to PAUDEEN_].

Give me the lamp. The lamp has not yet been lighted and the world is to
be consumed!

    [_Goes into inner room._

THOMAS [_seeing ANDREW_].

Is it here you are, Andrew? What are these beggars doing? Was this
door thrown open too? Why did you not keep order? I will go for the
constables to help us!

ANDREW.

You will not find them to help you. They were scattering themselves
through the drinking-houses of the town, and why wouldn’t they?

THOMAS.

Are you drunk too? You are worse than Martin. You are a disgrace!

ANDREW.

Disgrace yourself! Coming here to be making an attack on me and
badgering me and disparaging me! And what about yourself that turned me
to be a hypocrite?

THOMAS.

What are you saying?

ANDREW.

You did, I tell you! Weren’t you always at me to be regular and to be
working and to be going through the day and the night without company
and to be thinking of nothing but the trade? What did I want with a
trade? I got a sight of the fairy gold one time in the mountains.
I would have found it again and brought riches from it but for you
keeping me so close to the work.

THOMAS.

Oh, of all the ungrateful creatures! You know well that I cherished
you, leading you to live a decent, respectable life.

ANDREW.

You never had respect for the ancient ways. It is after the mother you
take it, that was too soft and too lumpish, having too much of the
English in her blood. Martin is a Hearne like myself. It is he has the
generous heart! It is not Martin would make a hypocrite of me and force
me to do night-walking secretly, watching to be back by the setting of
the seven stars!

    [_He begins to play his flute._

THOMAS.

I will turn you out of this, yourself and this filthy troop! I will
have them lodged in gaol.

JOHNNY.

Filthy troop, is it? Mind yourself! The change is coming. The pikes
will be up and the traders will go down!

    _All_ seize THOMAS and sing._

    When the Lion will lose his strength,
      And the braket-thistle begin to pine,
    The harp shall sound sweet, sweet at length,
      Between the eight and the nine!

THOMAS.

Let me out of this, you villains!

NANNY.

We’ll make a sieve of holes of you, you old bag of treachery!

BIDDY.

How well you threatened us with gaol, you skim of a weasel’s milk!

JOHNNY.

You heap of sicknesses! You blinking hangman! That you may never die
till you’ll get a blue hag for a wife!

    [_MARTIN comes back with lighted lamp._

MARTIN.

Let him go. [_They let THOMAS go, and fall back._] Spread out the
banner. The moment has come to begin the war.

JOHNNY.

Up with the Unicorn and destroy the Lion! Success to Johnny Gibbons and
all good men!

MARTIN.

Heap all those things together there. Heap those pieces of the coach
one upon another. Put that straw under them. It is with this flame I
will begin the work of destruction. All nature destroys and laughs.

THOMAS.

Destroy your own golden coach!

MARTIN [_kneeling before THOMAS_].

I am sorry to go a way that you do not like and to do a thing that
will vex you. I have been a great trouble to you since I was a child
in the house, and I am a great trouble to you yet. It is not my fault.
I have been chosen for what I have to do. [_Stands up._] I have to
free myself first and those that are near me. The love of God is a
very terrible thing! [_THOMAS tries to stop him, but is prevented by
_Beggars_. MARTIN takes a wisp of straw and lights it._] We will
destroy all that can perish! It is only the soul that can suffer no
injury. The soul of man is of the imperishable substance of the stars!

    [_He throws wisp into heap—it blazes up._




ACT III


    _Before dawn. A wild rocky place, NANNY and BIDDY LALLY
    squatting by a fire. Rich stuffs, etc., strewn about.
    PAUDEEN watching by MARTIN, who is lying as if dead, a
    sack over him._

NANNY [_to PAUDEEN_].

Well, you are great heroes and great warriors and great lads
altogether, to have put down the Brownes the way you did, yourselves
and the Whiteboys of the quarry. To have ransacked the house and have
plundered it! Look at the silks and the satins and the grandeurs I
brought away! Look at that now! [_Holds up a velvet cloak._] It’s a
good little jacket for myself will come out of it. It’s the singers
will be stopping their songs and the jobbers turning from their cattle
in the fairs to be taking a view of the laces of it and the buttons!
It’s my far-off cousins will be drawing from far and near!

BIDDY.

There was not so much gold in it all as what they were saying there
was. Or maybe that fleet of Whiteboys had the place ransacked before
we ourselves came in. Bad cess to them that put it in my mind to go
gather up the full of my bag of horseshoes out of the forge. Silver
they were saying they were, pure white silver; and what are they in
the end but only hardened iron! A bad end to them! [_Flings away
horseshoes._] The time I will go robbing big houses again it will
not be in the light of the full moon I will go doing it, that does
be causing every common thing to shine out as if for a deceit and a
mockery. It’s not shining at all they are at this time, but duck yellow
and dark.

NANNY.

To leave the big house blazing after us, it was that crowned all!
Two houses to be burned to ashes in the one night. It is likely the
servant-girls were rising from the feathers and the cocks crowing
from the rafters for seven miles around, taking the flames to be the
whitening of the dawn.

BIDDY.

It is the lad is stretched beyond you have to be thankful to for that.
There was never seen a leader was his equal for spirit and for daring.
Making a great scatter of the guards the way he did. Running up roofs
and ladders, the fire in his hand, till you’d think he would be apt to
strike his head against the stars.

NANNY.

I partly guessed death was near him, and the queer shining look he
had in his two eyes, and he throwing sparks east and west through the
beams. I wonder now was it some inward wound he got, or did some hardy
lad of the Brownes give him a tip on the skull unknownst in the fight?
It was I myself found him, and the troop of the Whiteboys gone, and he
lying by the side of a wall as weak as if he had knocked a mountain. I
failed to waken him trying him with the sharpness of my nails, and his
head fell back when I moved it, and I knew him to be spent and gone.

BIDDY.

It’s a pity you not to have left him where he was lying and said no
word at all to Paudeen or to that son you have, that kept us back from
following on, bringing him here to this shelter on sacks and upon poles.

NANNY.

What way could I help letting a screech out of myself, and the life but
just gone out of him in the darkness, and not a living Christian by his
side but myself and the great God?

BIDDY.

It’s on ourselves the vengeance of the red soldiers will fall, they to
find us sitting here the same as hares in a tuft. It would be best for
us follow after the rest of the army of the Whiteboys.

NANNY.

Whisht! I tell you. The lads are cracked about him. To get but the wind
of the word of leaving him, it’s little but they’d knock the head off
the two of us. Whisht!

    _Enter JOHNNY BACACH with candles._

JOHNNY [_standing over MARTIN_].

Wouldn’t you say now there was some malice or some venom in the air,
that is striking down one after another the whole of the heroes of the
Gael?

PAUDEEN.

It makes a person be thinking of the four last ends, death and
judgment, heaven and hell. Indeed and indeed my heart lies with him. It
is well I knew what man he was under his by-name and his disguise.

    [_Sings._] Oh, Johnny Gibbons, it’s you were the prop to us.
                    You to have left us, we are put astray!

JOHNNY.

It is lost we are now and broken to the end of our days. There is no
satisfaction at all but to be destroying the English, and where now
will we get so good a leader again? Lay him out fair and straight upon
a stone, till I will let loose the secret of my heart keening him!

    [_Sets out candles on a rock, propping them up with
    stones._

NANNY.

Is it mould candles you have brought to set around him, Johnny Bacach?
It is great riches you should have in your pocket to be going to those
lengths and not to be content with dips.

JOHNNY.

It is lengths I will not be going to the time the life will be gone out
of your own body. It is not your corpse I will be wishful to hold in
honour the way I hold this corpse in honour.

NANNY.

That’s the way always, there will be grief and quietness in the house
if it is a young person has died, but funning and springing and
tricking one another if it is an old person’s corpse is in it. There is
no compassion at all for the old.

PAUDEEN.

It is he would have got leave for the Gael to be as high as the Gall.
Believe me, he was in the prophecies. Let you not be comparing yourself
with the like of him.

NANNY.

Why wouldn’t I be comparing myself? Look at all that was against me in
the world. Would you be matching me against a man of his sort, that had
the people shouting him and that had nothing to do but to die and to go
to heaven?

JOHNNY.

The day you go to heaven that you may never come back alive out of it!
But it is not yourself will ever hear the saints hammering at their
musics! It is you will be moving through the ages, chains upon you,
and you in the form of a dog or a monster. I tell you that one will go
through Purgatory as quick as lightning through a thorn-bush.

NANNY.

That’s the way, that the way.

    [_Croons._] Three that are watching my time to run,
                     The worm, the devil, and my son,
                     To see a loop around their neck
                     It’s that would make my heart to lep!

JOHNNY.

Five white candles. I wouldn’t begrudge them to him indeed. If he had
held out and held up it is my belief he would have freed Ireland!

PAUDEEN.

Wait till the full light of the day and you’ll see the burying he’ll
have. It is not in this place we will be waking him. I’ll make a call
to the two hundred Ribbons he was to lead on to the attack on the
barracks at Aughanish. They will bring him marching to his grave upon
the hill. He had surely some gift from the other world, I wouldn’t say
but he had power from the other side.

ANDREW [_coming in very shaky_].

Well, it was a great night he gave to the village, and it is long
till it will be forgotten. I tell you the whole of the neighbours are
up against him. There is no one at all this morning to set the mills
going. There was no bread baked in the night-time, the horses are not
fed in the stalls, the cows are not milked in the sheds. I met no man
able to make a curse this night but he put it on my head and on the
head of the boy that is lying there before us ... Is there no sign of
life in him at all?

JOHNNY.

What way would there be a sign of life and the life gone out of him
this three hours or more?

ANDREW.

He was lying in his sleep for a while yesterday, and he wakened again
after another while.

NANNY.

He will not waken, I tell you. I held his hand in my own and it getting
cold as if you were pouring on it the coldest cold water, and no
running in his blood. He is gone sure enough and the life is gone out
of him.

ANDREW.

Maybe so, maybe so. It seems to me yesterday his cheeks were bloomy all
the while, and now he is as pale as wood ashes. Sure we all must come
to it at the last. Well, my white-headed darling, it is you were the
bush among us all, and you to be cut down in your prime. Gentle and
simple, everyone liked you. It is no narrow heart you had, it is you
were for spending and not for getting. It is you made a good wake for
yourself, scattering your estate in one night only in beer and in wine
for the whole province; and that you may be sitting in the middle of
Paradise and in the chair of the Graces!

JOHNNY.

Amen to that. It’s pity I didn’t think the time I sent for yourself to
send the little lad of a messenger looking for a priest to overtake
him. It might be in the end the Almighty is the best man for us all!

ANDREW.

Sure I sent him on myself to bid the priest to come. Living or dead I
would wish to do all that is rightful for the last and the best of my
own race and generation.

BIDDY [_jumping up_].

Is it the priest you are bringing in among us? Where is the sense
in that? Aren’t we robbed enough up to this with the expense of the
candles and the like?

JOHNNY.

If it is that poor starved priest he called to that came talking in
secret signs to the man that is gone, it is likely he will ask nothing
for what he has to do. There is many a priest is a Whiteboy in his
heart.

NANNY.

I tell you, if you brought him tied in a bag he would not say an Our
Father for you, without you having a half-crown at the top of your
fingers.

BIDDY.

There is no priest is any good at all but a spoiled priest. A one that
would take a drop of drink, it is he would have courage to face the
hosts of trouble. Rout them out he would, the same as a shoal of fish
from out the weeds. It’s best not to vex a priest, or to run against
them at all.

NANNY.

It’s yourself humbled yourself well to one the time you were sick in
the gaol and had like to die, and he bade you to give over the throwing
of the cups.

BIDDY.

Ah, plaster of Paris I gave him. I took to it again and I free upon the
roads.

NANNY.

Much good you are doing with it to yourself or any other one. Aren’t
you after telling that corpse no later than yesterday that he was
coming within the best day of his life?

JOHNNY.

Whisht, let ye. Here is the priest coming.

    _FATHER JOHN comes in._

FATHER JOHN.

It is surely not true that he is dead?

JOHNNY.

The spirit went from him about the middle hour of the night. We brought
him here to this sheltered place. We were loth to leave him without
friends.

FATHER JOHN.

Where is he?

JOHNNY [_taking up sacks_].

Lying there stiff and stark. He has a very quiet look as if there was
no sin at all or no great trouble upon his mind.

FATHER JOHN [_kneels and touches him_].

He is not dead.

BIDDY [_pointing to NANNY_].

He is dead. If it was letting on he was, he would not have let that one
rob him and search him the way she did.

FATHER JOHN.

It has the appearance of death, but it is not death. He is in a trance.

PAUDEEN.

Is it Heaven and Hell he is walking at this time to be bringing back
newses of the sinners in pain?

BIDDY.

I was thinking myself it might away he was, riding on white horses with
the riders of the forths.

JOHNNY.

He will have great wonders to tell out the time he will rise up from
the ground. It is a pity he not to waken at this time and to lead us on
to overcome the troop of the English. Sure those that are in a trance
get strength, that they can walk on water.

ANDREW.

It was Father John wakened him yesterday the time he was lying in the
same way. Wasn’t I telling you it was for that I called to him?

BIDDY.

Waken him now till they’ll see did I tell any lie in my foretelling. I
knew well by the signs, he was coming within the best day of his life.

PAUDEEN.

And not dead at all! We’ll be marching to attack Dublin itself within a
week. The horn will blow for him, and all good men will gather to him.
Hurry on, Father, and waken him.

FATHER JOHN.

I will not waken him. I will not bring him back from where he is.

JOHNNY.

And how long will it be before he will waken of himself?

FATHER JOHN.

Maybe to-day, maybe to-morrow, it is hard to be certain.

BIDDY.

If it is _away_ he is he might be away seven years. To be lying like
a stump of a tree and using no food and the world not able to knock a
word out of him, I know the signs of it well.

JOHNNY.

We cannot be waiting and watching through seven years. If the business
he has started is to be done we have to go on here and now. The
time there is any delay, that is the time the Government will get
information. Waken him now, Father, and you’ll get the blessing of the
generations.

FATHER JOHN.

I will not bring him back. God will bring him back in his own good
time. For all I know he may be seeing the hidden things of God.

JOHNNY.

He might slip away in his dream. It is best to raise him up now.

ANDREW.

Waken him, Father John. I thought he was surely dead this time,
and what way could I go face Thomas through all that is left of my
lifetime, after me standing up to face him the way I did? And if I do
take a little drop of an odd night, sure I’d be very lonesome if I did
not take it. All the world knows it’s not for love of what I drink, but
for love of the people that do be with me! Waken him, Father, or maybe
I would waken him myself. [_Shakes him._]

FATHER JOHN.

Lift your hand from touching him. Leave him to himself and to the power
of God.

JOHNNY.

If you will not bring him back why wouldn’t we ourselves do it? Go on
now, it is best for you to do it yourself.

FATHER JOHN.

I woke him yesterday. He was angry with me, he could not get to the
heart of the command.

JOHNNY.

If he did not, he got a command from myself that satisfied him, and a
message.

FATHER JOHN.

He did—he took it from you—and how do I know what devil’s message it
may have been that brought him into that devil’s work, destruction and
drunkenness and burnings! That was not a message from heaven! It was
I awoke him, it was I kept him from hearing what was maybe a divine
message, a voice of truth, and he heard you speak and he believed the
message was brought by you. You have made use of your deceit and his
mistaking—you have left him without house or means to support him, you
are striving to destroy and to drag him to entire ruin. I will not help
you, I would rather see him die in his trance and go into God’s hands
than awake him and see him go into hell’s mouth with vagabonds and
outcasts like you!

JOHNNY [_turning to BIDDY_].

You should have knowledge, Biddy Lally, of the means to bring back a
man that is away.

BIDDY.

The power of the earth will do it through its herbs, and the power of
the air will do it kindling fire into flame.

JOHNNY.

Rise up and make no delay. Stretch out and gather a handful of an herb
that will bring him back from whatever place he is in.

BIDDY.

Where is the use of herbs, and his teeth clenched the way he could not
use them?

JOHNNY.

Take fire so in the devil’s name, and put it to the soles of his feet.

    [_Takes a lighted sod from fire._

FATHER JOHN.

Let him alone, I say! [_Dashes away the sod._

JOHNNY.

I will not leave him alone! I will not give in to leave him swooning
there and the country waiting for him to awake!

FATHER JOHN.

I tell you I awoke him! I sent him into thieves’ company! I will not
have him wakened again and evil things it maybe waiting to take hold of
him! Back from him, back, I say! Will you dare to lay a hand on me! You
cannot do it! You cannot touch him against my will!

BIDDY.

Mind yourself, do not be bringing us under the curse of the Church.

    [_JOHNNY steps back. MARTIN moves._

FATHER JOHN.

It is God has him in His care. It is He is awaking him. [_MARTIN has
risen to his elbow._] Do not touch him, do not speak to him, he may be
hearing great secrets.

MARTIN.

That music, I must go nearer—sweet marvellous music—louder than the
trampling of the unicorns; far louder, though the mountain is shaking
with their feet—high joyous music.

FATHER JOHN.

Hush, he is listening to the music of Heaven!

MARTIN.

Take me to you, musicians, wherever you are! I will go nearer to you;
I hear you better now, more and more joyful; that is strange, it is
strange.

FATHER JOHN.

He is getting some secret.

MARTIN.

It is the music of Paradise, that is certain, somebody said that. It is
certainly the music of Paradise. Ah, now I hear, now I understand. It
is made of the continual clashing of swords!

JOHNNY.

That is the best music. We will clash them sure enough. We will clash
our swords and our pikes on the bayonets of the red soldiers. It is
well you rose up from the dead to lead us! Come on, now, come on!

MARTIN.

Who are you? Ah, I remember—where are you asking me to come to?

PAUDEEN.

To come on, to be sure, to the attack on the barracks at Aughanish. To
carry on the work you took in hand last night.

MARTIN.

What work did I take in hand last night? Oh, yes, I remember—some big
house—we burned it down—but I had not understood the vision when I did
that. I had not heard the command right. That was not the work I was
sent to do.

PAUDEEN.

Rise up now and bid us what to do. Your great name itself will clear
the road before you. It is you yourself will have freed all Ireland
before the stooks will be in stacks!

MARTIN.

Listen, I will explain—I have misled you. It is only now I have the
whole vision plain. As I lay there I saw through everything, I know
all. It was but a frenzy that going out to burn and to destroy. What
have I to do with the foreign army? What I have to pierce is the wild
heart of time. My business is not reformation but revelation.

JOHNNY.

If you are going to turn back now from leading us, you are no better
than any other traitor that ever gave up the work he took in hand. Let
you come and face now the two hundred men you brought out daring the
power of the law last night, and give them your reason for failing them.

MARTIN.

I was mistaken when I set out to destroy Church and Law. The battle we
have to fight is fought out in our own mind. There is a fiery moment,
perhaps once in a lifetime, and in that moment we see the only thing
that matters. It is in that moment the great battles are lost and won,
for in that moment we are a part of the host of heaven.

PAUDEEN.

Have you betrayed us to the naked hangman with your promises and with
your drink? If you brought us out here to fail us and to ridicule us,
it is the last day you will live!

JOHNNY.

The curse of my heart on you! It would be right to send you to your own
place on the flagstone of the traitors in hell. When once I have made
an end of you I will be as well satisfied to be going to my death for
it as if I was going home!

MARTIN.

Father John, Father John, can you not hear? Can you not see? Are you
blind? Are you deaf?

FATHER JOHN.

What is it? What is it?

MARTIN.

There on the mountain, a thousand white unicorns trampling; a thousand
riders with their swords drawn—the swords clashing! Oh, the sound of
the swords, the sound of the clashing of the swords!

    [_He goes slowly off stage. JOHNNY takes up a stone to
    throw at him._

FATHER JOHN [_seizing his arm_].

Stop—do you not see he is beyond the world?

BIDDY.

Keep your hand off him, Johnny Bacach. If he is gone wild and cracked,
that’s natural. Those that have been wakened from a trance on a sudden
are apt to go bad and light in the head.

PAUDEEN.

If it is madness is on him, it is not he himself should pay the penalty.

BIDDY.

To prey on the mind it does, and rises into the head. There are some
would go over any height and would have great power in their madness.
It is maybe to some secret cleft he is going, to get knowledge of the
great cure for all things, or of the Plough that was hidden in the old
times, the Golden Plough.

PAUDEEN.

It seemed as if he was talking through honey. He had the look of one
that had seen great wonders. It is maybe among the old heroes of
Ireland he went raising armies for our help.

FATHER JOHN.

God take him in his care and keep him from lying spirits and from all
delusions!

JOHNNY.

We have got candles here, Father. We had them to put around his body.
Maybe they would keep away the evil things of the air.

PAUDEEN.

Light them so, and he will say out a Mass for him the same as in a
lime-washed church.

    [_They light the candles._

_THOMAS comes in._

THOMAS.

Where is he? I am come to warn him. The destruction he did in the
night-time has been heard of. The soldiers are out after him and the
constables—there are two of the constables not far off—there are others
on every side—they heard he was here in the mountain—where is he?

FATHER JOHN.

He has gone up the path.

THOMAS.

Hurry after him! Tell him to hide himself—this attack he had a hand in
is a hanging crime. Tell him to hide himself, to come to me when all is
quiet—bad as his doings are, he is my own brother’s son; I will get him
on to a ship that will be going to France.

FATHER JOHN.

That will be best, send him back to the Brothers and to the wise
Bishops. They can unravel this tangle, I cannot. I cannot be sure of
the truth.

THOMAS.

Here are the constables, he will see them and get away. Say no word.
The Lord be praised that he is out of sight.

    _Constables_ come in._

CONSTABLE.

The man we are looking for, where is he? He was seen coming here along
with you. You have to give him up into the power of the law.

JOHNNY.

We will not give him up. Go back out of this or you will be sorry.

PAUDEEN.

We are not in dread of you or the like of you.

BIDDY.

Throw them down over the rocks!

NANNY.

Give them to the picking of the crows!

ALL.

Down with the law!

FATHER JOHN.

Hush! He is coming back. [_To _Constables._] Stop, stop—leave him
to himself. He is not trying to escape, he is coming towards you.

PAUDEEN.

There is a sort of a brightness about him. I misjudged him calling him
a traitor. It is not to this world he belongs at all. He is over on the
other side.

MARTIN.

    [_Standing beside the rock where the lighted candles
    are._]

    _Et calix meus inebrians quam præclarus est!_

FATHER JOHN.

I must know what he has to say. It is not from himself he is speaking.

MARTIN.

Father John, Heaven is not what we have believed it to be. It is not
quiet, it is not singing and making music, and all strife at an end.
I have seen it, I have been there. The lover still loves but with a
greater passion, and the rider still rides but the horse goes like the
wind and leaps the ridges, and the battle goes on always, always. That
is the joy of Heaven, continual battle. I thought the battle was here,
and that the joy was to be found here on earth, that all one had to do
was to bring again the old wild earth of the stories—but no, it is not
here; we shall not come to that joy, that battle, till we have put out
the senses, everything that can be seen and handled, as I put out this
candle. [_He puts out candle._] We must put out the whole world as I
put out this candle [_puts out another candle_]. We must put out the
light of the stars and the light of the sun and the light of the moon
[_puts out the rest of the candles_], till we have brought everything
to nothing once again. I saw in a broken vision, but now all is clear
to me. Where there is nothing, where there is nothing—there is God!

CONSTABLE.

Now we will take him!

JOHNNY.

We will never give him up to the law!

PAUDEEN.

Make your escape! We will not let you be followed.

    [_They struggle with _Constables_; the women help
    them; all disappear struggling. There is a shot. MARTIN
    stumbles and falls. _Beggars_ come back with a
    shout._

JOHNNY.

We have done for them, they will not meddle with you again.

PAUDEEN.

Oh, he is down!

FATHER JOHN.

He is shot through the breast. Oh, who has dared meddle with a soul
that was in the tumults on the threshold of sanctity?

JOHNNY.

It was that gun went off and I striking it from the constable’s hand.

MARTIN.

    [_Looking at his hand, on which there is blood._]

Ah, that is blood! I fell among the rocks. It is a hard climb. It is
a long climb to the vineyards of Eden. Help me up. I must go on. The
Mountain of Abiegnos is very high—but the vineyards—the vineyards!

    [_He falls back dead. The men uncover their heads._

PAUDEEN [_to BIDDY_].

It was you misled him with your foretelling that he was coming within
the best day of his life.

JOHNNY.

Madness on him or no madness, I will not leave that body to the law to
be buried with a dog’s burial or brought away and maybe hanged upon a
tree. Lift him on the sacks, bring him away to the quarry; it is there
on the hillside the boys will give him a great burying, coming on
horses and bearing white rods in their hands.

    [_NANNY lays the velvet cloak over him._

_They lift him and carry the body away singing:_

    Our hope and our darling, our heart dies with you,
    You to have failed us, we are foals astray!

FATHER JOHN.

He is gone and we can never know where that vision came from. I cannot
know—the wise Bishops would have known.

THOMAS [_taking up banner_].

To be shaping a lad through his lifetime, and he to go his own way
at the last, and a queer way. It is very queer the world itself is,
whatever shape was put upon it at the first.

ANDREW.

To be too headstrong and too open, that is the beginning of trouble. To
keep to yourself the thing that you know, and to do in quiet the thing
you want to do. There would be no disturbance at all in the world, all
people to bear that in mind!
﻿THE HOUR-GLASS:

A MORALITY




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    A WISE MAN
    A FOOL
    SOME PUPILS
    AN ANGEL
    THE WISE MAN’S WIFE AND TWO CHILDREN




THE HOUR-GLASS:

A MORALITY


    _A large room with a door at the back and another at
    the side, or else a curtained place where persons can
    enter by parting the curtains. A desk and a chair at
    one side. An hour-glass on a bracket or stand near the
    door. A creepy stool near it. Some benches. A WISE MAN
    sitting at his desk._

WISE MAN.

    [_Turning over the pages of a book._]

WHERE is that passage I am to explain to my pupils to-day? Here it
is, and the book says that it was written by a beggar on the walls of
Babylon: ‘There are two living countries, the one visible and the one
invisible; and when it is winter with us it is summer in that country,
and when the November winds are up among us it is lambing-time there.’
I wish that my pupils had asked me to explain any other passage. [_The
FOOL comes in and stands at the door holding out his hat. He has a pair
of shears in the other hand._] It sounds to me like foolishness; and
yet that cannot be, for the writer of this book, where I have found
so much knowledge, would not have set it by itself on this page, and
surrounded it with so many images and so many deep colours and so much
fine gilding, if it had been foolishness.

FOOL.

Give me a penny.

WISE MAN [_turns to another page_].

Here he has written: ‘The learned in old times forgot the visible
country.’ That I understand, but I have taught my learners better.

FOOL.

Won’t you give me a penny?

WISE MAN.

What do you want? The words of the wise Saracen will not teach you much.

FOOL.

Such a great wise teacher as you are will not refuse a penny to a fool.

WISE MAN.

What do you know about wisdom?

FOOL.

Oh, I know! I know what I have seen.

WISE MAN.

What is it you have seen?

FOOL.

When I went by Kilcluan where the bells used to be ringing at the
break of every day, I could hear nothing but the people snoring in
their houses. When I went by Tubbervanach, where the young men used
to be climbing the hill to the blessed well, they were sitting at the
crossroads playing cards. When I went by Carrigoras, where the friars
used to be fasting and serving the poor, I saw them drinking wine and
obeying their wives. And when I asked what misfortune had brought all
these changes, they said it was no misfortune, but it was the wisdom
they had learned from your teaching.

WISE MAN.

Run round to the kitchen, and my wife will give you something to eat.

FOOL.

That is foolish advice for a wise man to give.

WISE MAN.

Why, Fool?

FOOL.

What is eaten is gone. I want pennies for my bag. I must buy bacon
in the shops, and nuts in the market, and strong drink for the time
when the sun is weak. And I want snares to catch the rabbits and the
squirrels and the hares, and a pot to cook them in.

WISE MAN.

Go away. I have other things to think of now than giving you pennies.

FOOL.

Give me a penny and I will bring you luck. Bresal the Fisherman lets me
sleep among the nets in his loft in the winter-time because he says I
bring him luck; and in the summer-time the wild creatures let me sleep
near their nests and their holes. It is lucky even to look at me or to
touch me, but it is much more lucky to give me a penny. [_Holds out his
hand._] If I wasn’t lucky, I’d starve.

WISE MAN.

What have you got the shears for?

FOOL.

I won’t tell you. If I told you, you would drive them away.

WISE MAN.

Whom would I drive away?

FOOL.

I won’t tell you.

WISE MAN.

Not if I give you a penny?

FOOL.

No.

WISE MAN.

Not if I give you two pennies?

FOOL.

You will be very lucky if you give me two pennies, but I won’t tell you!

WISE MAN.

Three pennies?

FOOL.

Four, and I will tell you!

WISE MAN.

Very well, four. But I will not call you Teig the Fool any longer.

FOOL.

Let me come close to you where nobody will hear me. But first you must
promise you will not drive them away. [_WISE MAN nods._] Every day men
go out dressed in black and spread great black nets over the hills,
great black nets.

WISE MAN.

Why do they do that?

FOOL.

That they may catch the feet of the angels. But every morning, just
before the dawn, I go out and cut the nets with my shears, and the
angels fly away.

WISE MAN.

Ah, now I know that you are Teig the Fool. You have told me that I am
wise, and I have never seen an angel.

FOOL.

I have seen plenty of angels.

WISE MAN.

Do you bring luck to the angels too?

FOOL.

Oh, no, no! No one could do that. But they are always there if one
looks about one; they are like the blades of grass.

WISE MAN.

When do you see them?

FOOL.

When one gets quiet, then something wakes up inside one, something
happy and quiet like the stars—not like the seven that move, but like
the fixed stars. [_He points upward._

WISE MAN.

And what happens then?

FOOL.

Then all in a minute one smells summer flowers, and tall people go by,
happy and laughing, and their clothes are the colour of burning sods.

WISE MAN.

Is it long since you have seen them, Teig the Fool?

FOOL.

Not long, glory be to God! I saw one coming behind me just now. It was
not laughing, but it had clothes the colour of burning sods, and there
was something shining about its head.

WISE MAN.

Well, there are your four pennies. You, a fool, say ‘Glory be to God,’
but before I came the wise men said it.

FOOL.

Four pennies! That means a great deal of luck. Great teacher, I have
brought you plenty of luck! [_He goes out shaking the bag._

WISE MAN.

Though they call him Teig the Fool, he is not more foolish than
everybody used to be, with their dreams and their preachings and
their three worlds; but I have overthrown their three worlds with the
seven sciences. With Philosophy that was made from the lonely star, I
have taught them to forget Theology; with Architecture, I have hidden
the ramparts of their cloudy heaven; with Music, the fierce planets’
daughter whose hair is always on fire, and with Grammar that is the
moon’s daughter, I have shut their ears to the imaginary harpings
and speech of the angels; and I have made formations of battle with
Arithmetic that have put the hosts of heaven to the rout. But, Rhetoric
and Dialectic, that have been born out of the light star and out of
the amorous star, you have been my spearman and my catapult! Oh! my
swift horsemen! Oh! my keen darting arguments, it is because of you
that I have overthrown the hosts of foolishness! [_An ANGEL, in a dress
the colour of embers, and carrying a blossoming apple-bough in her
hand and a gilded halo about her head, stands upon the threshold._]
Before I came, men’s minds were stuffed with folly about a heaven
where birds sang the hours, and about angels that came and stood upon
men’s thresholds. But I have locked the visions into heaven and turned
the key upon them. Well, I must consider this passage about the two
countries. My mother used to say something of the kind. She would
say that when our bodies sleep our souls awake, and that whatever
withers here ripens yonder, and that harvests are snatched from us
that they may feed invisible people. But the meaning of the book may
be different, for only fools and women have thoughts like that; their
thoughts were never written upon the walls of Babylon. I must ring
the bell for my pupils. [_He sees the ANGEL._] What are you? Who are
you? I think I saw some that were like you in my dreams when I was a
child—that bright thing, that dress that is the colour of embers! But I
have done with dreams, I have done with dreams.

ANGEL.

I am the Angel of the Most High God.

WISE MAN.

Why have you come to me?

ANGEL.

I have brought you a message.

WISE MAN.

What message have you got for me?

ANGEL.

You will die within the hour. You will die when the last grains have
fallen in this glass.

    [_She turns the hour-glass._

WISE MAN.

My time to die has not come. I have my pupils. I have a young wife and
children that I cannot leave. Why must I die?

ANGEL.

You must die because no souls have passed over the threshold of Heaven
since you came into this country. The threshold is grassy, and the
gates are rusty, and the angels that keep watch there are lonely.

WISE MAN.

Where will death bring me to?

ANGEL.

The doors of Heaven will not open to you, for you have denied the
existence of Heaven; and the doors of Purgatory will not open to you,
for you have denied the existence of Purgatory.

WISE MAN.

But I have also denied the existence of Hell!

ANGEL.

Hell is the place of those who deny.

WISE MAN [_kneels_].

I have, indeed, denied everything, and have taught others to deny. I
have believed in nothing but what my senses told me. But, oh! beautiful
Angel, forgive me, forgive me!

ANGEL.

You should have asked forgiveness long ago.

WISE MAN.

Had I seen your face as I see it now, oh! beautiful angel, I would have
believed, I would have asked forgiveness. Maybe you do not know how
easy it is to doubt. Storm, death, the grass rotting, many sicknesses,
those are the messengers that came to me. Oh! why are you silent? You
carry the pardon of the Most High; give it to me! I would kiss your
hands if I were not afraid—no, no, the hem of your dress!

ANGEL.

You let go undying hands too long ago to take hold of them now.

WISE MAN.

You cannot understand. You live in a country that we can only dream
about. Maybe it is as hard for you to understand why we disbelieve as
it is for us to believe. Oh! what have I said! You know everything!
Give me time to undo what I have done. Give me a year—a month—a day—an
hour! Give me to this hour’s end, that I may undo what I have done!

ANGEL.

You cannot undo what you have done. Yet I have this power with my
message. If you can find one that believes before the hour’s end, you
shall come to Heaven after the years of Purgatory. For, from one fiery
seed, watched over by those that sent me, the harvest can come again to
heap the golden threshing-floor. But now farewell, for I am weary of
the weight of time.

WISE MAN.

Blessed be the Father, blessed be the Son, blessed be the Spirit,
blessed be the Messenger They have sent!

ANGEL.

    [_At the door and pointing at the hour-glass._]

In a little while the uppermost glass will be empty. [_Goes out._

WISE MAN.

Everything will be well with me. I will call my pupils; they only say
they doubt. [_Pulls the bell._] They will be here in a moment. They
want to please me; they pretend that they disbelieve. Belief is too
old to be overcome all in a minute. Besides, I can prove what I once
disproved. [_Another pull at the bell._] They are coming now. I will go
to my desk. I will speak quietly, as if nothing had happened.

    [_He stands at the desk with a fixed look in his eyes.
    The voices of THE PUPILS are heard singing these words_:

    I was going the road one day—
    O the brown and the yellow beer—
    And I met with a man that was no right man:
    O my dear, O my dear!

    _Enter PUPILS and the FOOL._

FOOL.

Leave me alone. Leave me alone. Who is that pulling at my bag? King’s
son, do not pull at my bag.

A YOUNG MAN.

Did your friends the angels give you that bag? Why don’t they fill your
bag for you?

FOOL.

Give me pennies! Give me some pennies!

A YOUNG MAN.

What do you want pennies for? that great bag at your waist is heavy.

FOOL.

I want to buy bacon in the shops, and nuts in the market, and strong
drink for the time when the sun is weak, and snares to catch rabbits
and the squirrels that steal the nuts, and hares, and a great pot to
cook them in.

A YOUNG MAN.

Why don’t your friends tell you where buried treasures are? Why don’t
they make you dream about treasures? If one dreams three times there is
always treasure.

FOOL [_holding out his hat_].

Give me pennies! Give me pennies!

    [_They throw pennies into his hat. He is standing close
    to the door, that he may hold out his hat to each
    newcomer._

A YOUNG MAN.

Master, will you have Teig the Fool for a scholar?

ANOTHER YOUNG MAN.

Teig, will you give us your pennies if we teach you lessons? No, he
goes to school for nothing on the mountains. Tell us what you learn on
the mountains, Teig?

WISE MAN.

Be silent all! [_He has been standing silent, looking away._] Stand
still in your places, for there is something I would have you tell me.

    [_A moment’s pause. They all stand round in their
    places. TEIG still stands at the door._

WISE MAN.

Is there any one amongst you who believes in God? In Heaven? Or in
Purgatory? Or in Hell?

ALL THE YOUNG MEN.

No one, Master! No one!

WISE MAN.

I knew you would all say that; but do not be afraid. I will not be
angry. Tell me the truth. Do you not believe?

A YOUNG MAN.

We once did, but you have taught us to know better.

WISE MAN.

Oh! teaching, teaching does not go very deep! The heart remains
unchanged under it all. You have the faith that you always had, and you
are afraid to tell me.

A YOUNG MAN.

No, no, Master!

WISE MAN.

If you tell me that you have not changed I shall be glad and not angry.

A YOUNG MAN [_to his _Neighbour_].

He wants somebody to dispute with.

HIS NEIGHBOUR.

I knew that from the beginning.

A YOUNG MAN.

That is not the subject for to-day; you were going to talk about the
words the beggar wrote upon the walls of Babylon.

WISE MAN.

If there is one amongst you that believes, he will be my best friend.
Surely there is one amongst you. [_They are all silent._] Surely what
you learned at your mother’s knees has not been so soon forgotten.

A YOUNG MAN.

Master, till you came, no teacher in this land was able to get rid of
foolishness and ignorance. But every one has listened to you, every one
has learned the truth. You have had your last disputation.

ANOTHER.

What a fool you made of that monk in the market-place! He had not a
word to say.

WISE MAN.

    [_Comes from his desk and stands among them in the
    middle of the room._]

Pupils, dear friends, I have deceived you all this time. It was I
myself who was ignorant. There is a God. There is a Heaven. There is
fire that passes, and there is fire that lasts for ever.

    [_TEIG, through all this, is sitting on a stool by the
    door, reckoning on his fingers what he will buy with
    his money._

A YOUNG MAN [_to _Another_].

He will not be satisfied till we dispute with him. [_To the WISE MAN._]
Prove it, Master. Have you seen them?

WISE MAN [_in a low, solemn voice_].

Just now, before you came in, someone came to the door, and when I
looked up I saw an angel standing there.

A YOUNG MAN.

You were in a dream. Anybody can see an angel in his dreams.

WISE MAN.

Oh, my God! It was not a dream! I was awake, waking as I am now. I tell
you I was awake as I am now.

A YOUNG MAN.

Some dream when they are awake, but they are the crazy, and who would
believe what they say? Forgive me, Master, but that is what you taught
me to say. That is what you said to the monk when he spoke of the
visions of the saints and the martyrs.

ANOTHER YOUNG MAN.

You see how well we remember your teaching.

WISE MAN.

Out, out from my sight! I want someone with belief. I must find that
grain the Angel spoke of before I die. I tell you I must find it, and
you answer me with arguments. Out with you, out of my sight!

    [_The _Young Men_ laugh._

A YOUNG MAN.

How well he plays at faith! He is like the monk when he had nothing
more to say.

WISE MAN.

Out, out! This is no time for laughter! Out with you, though you are a
king’s son!

    [_They begin to hurry out._

A YOUNG MAN.

Come, come; he wants us to find someone who will dispute with him.
[_All go out._

WISE MAN.

    [_Alone; he goes to the door at the side._]

I will call my wife. She will believe; women always believe. [_He opens
the door and calls._] Bridget! Bridget! [_BRIDGET comes in wearing her
apron, her sleeves turned up from her floury arms._] Bridget, tell me
the truth; do not say what you think will please me. Do you sometimes
say your prayers?

BRIDGET.

Prayers! No, you taught me to leave them off long ago. At first I was
sorry, but I am glad now for I am sleepy in the evenings.

WISE MAN.

But do you not believe in God?

BRIDGET.

Oh, a good wife only believes what her husband tells her!

WISE MAN.

But sometimes when you are alone, when I am in the school and the
children asleep, do you not think about the saints, about the things
you used to believe in? What do you think of when you are alone?

BRIDGET [_considering_].

I think about nothing. Sometimes I wonder if the linen is bleaching
white, or I go out to see if the crows are picking up the chickens’
food.

WISE MAN.

Oh, what can I do! Is there nobody who believes he can never die? I
must go and find somebody! [_He goes towards the door, but stops with
his eyes fixed on the hour-glass._] I cannot go out; I cannot leave
that. Go, and call my pupils again. I will make them understand. I will
say to them that only amid spiritual terror, or only when all that
laid hold on life is shaken can we see truth. There is something in
Plato, but—no, do not call them. They would answer as I have bid.

BRIDGET.

You want somebody to get up an argument with.

WISE MAN.

Oh, look out of the door and tell me if there is anybody there in the
street. I cannot leave this glass; somebody might shake it! Then the
sand would fall more quickly.

BRIDGET.

I don’t understand what you are saying. [_Looks out._] There is a great
crowd of people talking to your pupils.

WISE MAN.

Oh, run out, Bridget, and see if they have found somebody that all the
time I was teaching understood nothing or did not listen!

BRIDGET.

    [_Wiping her arms in her apron and pulling down her
    sleeves._]

It’s a hard thing to be married to a man of learning that must be
always having arguments. [_Goes out and shouts through the kitchen
door._] Don’t be meddling with the bread, children, while I’m out.

WISE MAN [_kneels down_].

‘_Confiteor Deo Omnipotenti beatæ Mariæ ..._’ I have forgotten it all.
It is thirty years since I have said a prayer. I must pray in the
common tongue, like a clown begging in the market, like Teig the Fool!
[_He prays._] Help me, Father, Son, and Spirit!

    [_BRIDGET enters, followed by the FOOL, who is holding
    out his hat to her._

FOOL.

Give me something; give me a penny to buy bacon in the shops, and nuts
in the market, and strong drink for the time when the sun grows weak.

BRIDGET.

I have no pennies. [_To the WISE MAN._] Your pupils cannot find anybody
to argue with you. There is nobody in the whole country who has enough
belief to fill a pipe with since you put down the monk. Can’t you be
quiet now and not always wanting to have arguments? It must be terrible
to have a mind like that.

WISE MAN.

I am lost! I am lost!

BRIDGET.

Leave me alone now; I have to make the bread for you and the children.

WISE MAN.

Out of this, woman, out of this, I say! [_BRIDGET goes through the
kitchen door._] Will nobody find a way to help me! But she spoke of my
children. I had forgotten them. They will believe. It is only those who
have reason that doubt; the young are full of faith. Bridget, Bridget,
send my children to me.

BRIDGET [_inside_].

Your father wants you; run to him now.

    [_The two CHILDREN come in. They stand together a
    little way from the threshold of the kitchen door,
    looking timidly at their father._

WISE MAN.

Children, what do you believe? Is there a Heaven? Is there a Hell? Is
there a Purgatory?

FIRST CHILD.

We haven’t forgotten, father.

THE OTHER CHILD.

O no, father. [_They both speak together as if in school._] There is
nothing we cannot see; there is nothing we cannot touch.

FIRST CHILD.

Foolish people used to think that there was, but you are very learned
and you have taught us better.

WISE MAN.

You are just as bad as the others, just as bad as the others! Do not
run away, come back to me! [_The CHILDREN begin to cry and run away._]
Why are you afraid? I will teach you better—no, I will never teach you
again. Go to your mother! no, she will not be able to teach them....
Help them, O God!... The grains are going very quickly. There is very
little sand in the uppermost glass. Somebody will come for me in a
moment; perhaps he is at the door now! All creatures that have reason
doubt. O that the grass and the plants could speak! Somebody has said
that they would wither if they doubted. O speak to me, O grass blades!
O fingers of God’s certainty, speak to me! You are millions and you
will not speak. I dare not know the moment the messenger will come for
me. I will cover the glass. [_He covers it and brings it to the desk.
Sees the FOOL, who is sitting by the door playing with some flowers
which he has stuck in his hat. He has begun to blow a dandelion-head._]
What are you doing?

FOOL.

Wait a moment. [_He blows._] Four, five, six.

WISE MAN.

What are you doing that for?

FOOL.

I am blowing at the dandelion to find out what time it is.

WISE MAN.

You have heard everything! That is why you want to find out what hour
it is! You are waiting to see them coming through the door to carry me
away. [_FOOL goes on blowing._] Out through the door with you! I will
have no one here when they come. [_He seizes the FOOL by the shoulders,
and begins to force him out through the door, then suddenly changes his
mind._] No, I have something to ask you. [_He drags him back into the
room._] Is there a Heaven? Is there a Hell? Is there a Purgatory?

FOOL.

So you ask me now. When you were asking your pupils, I said to myself,
if he would ask Teig the Fool, Teig could tell him all about it, for
Teig has learned all about it when he has been cutting the nets.

WISE MAN.

Tell me; tell me!

FOOL.

I said, Teig knows everything. Not even the cats or the hares that milk
the cows have Teig’s wisdom. But Teig will not speak; he says nothing.

WISE MAN.

Tell me, tell me! For under the cover the grains are falling, and when
they are all fallen I shall die; and my soul will be lost if I have not
found somebody that believes! Speak, speak!

FOOL [_looking wise_].

No, no, I won’t tell you what is in my mind, and I won’t tell you what
is in my bag. You might steal away my thoughts. I met a bodach on the
road yesterday, and he said, ‘Teig, tell me how many pennies are in
your bag; I will wager three pennies that there are not twenty pennies
in your bag; let me put in my hand and count them.’ But I pulled the
strings tighter, like this; and when I go to sleep every night I hide
the bag where no one knows.

WISE MAN.

    [_Goes towards the hour-glass as if to uncover it._]

No, no, I have not the courage. [_He kneels._] Have pity upon me, Fool,
and tell me!

FOOL.

Ah! Now, that is different. I am not afraid of you now. But I must come
nearer to you; somebody in there might hear what the Angel said.

WISE MAN.

Oh, what did the Angel tell you?

FOOL.

Once I was alone on the hills, and an angel came by and he said, ‘Teig
the Fool, do not forget the Three Fires; the Fire that punishes, the
Fire that purifies, and the Fire wherein the soul rejoices for ever!’

WISE MAN.

He believes! I am saved! The sand has run out.... [_FOOL helps him to
his chair._] I am going from the country of the seven wandering stars,
and I am going to the country of the fixed stars! I understand it all
now. One sinks in on God; we do not see the truth; God sees the truth
in us. Ring the bell. They are coming. Tell them, Fool, that when the
life and the mind are broken the truth comes through them like peas
through a broken peascod. Pray, Fool, that they may be given a sign and
carry their souls alive out of the dying world. Your prayers are better
than mine.

    [_FOOL bows his head. WISE MAN’S head sinks on his arm
    on the books. PUPILS are heard singing as before, but
    now they come right on to the stage before they cease
    their song._

A YOUNG MAN.

Look at the Fool turned bell-ringer!

ANOTHER.

What have you called us in for, Teig? What are you going to tell us?

ANOTHER.

No wonder he has had dreams! See, he is fast asleep now. [_Goes over
and touches him._] Oh, he is dead!

FOOL.

Do not stir! He asked for a sign that you might be saved. [_All are
silent for a moment._] ... Look what has come from his mouth ... a
little winged thing ... a little shining thing.... It is gone to the
door. [_The ANGEL appears in the doorway, stretches out her hands and
closes them again._] The Angel has taken it in her hands.... She will
open her hands in the Garden of Paradise. [_They all kneel._]
﻿CATHLEEN NI HOULIHAN




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    PETER GILLANE
    MICHAEL GILLANE, _his Son, going to be married_
    PATRICK GILLANE, _a lad of twelve, Michael’s Brother_
    BRIDGET GILLANE, _Peter’s Wife_
    DELIA CAHEL, _engaged to Michael_
    THE POOR OLD WOMAN
    Neighbours




CATHLEEN NI HOULIHAN


    _Interior of a cottage close to Killala, in 1798.
    BRIDGET is standing at a table undoing a parcel. PETER
    is sitting at one side of the fire, PATRICK at the
    other._

PETER.

What is that sound I hear?

PATRICK.

I don’t hear anything. [_He listens._] I hear it now. It’s like
cheering. [_He goes to the window and looks out._] I wonder what they
are cheering about. I don’t see anybody.

PETER.

It might be a hurling.

PATRICK.

There’s no hurling to-day. It must be down in the town the cheering is.

BRIDGET.

I suppose the boys must be having some sport of their own. Come over
here, Peter, and look at Michael’s wedding-clothes.

PETER [_shifts his chair to table_].

Those are grand clothes, indeed.

BRIDGET.

You hadn’t clothes like that when you married me, and no coat to put on
of a Sunday more than any other day.

PETER.

That is true, indeed. We never thought a son of our own would be
wearing a suit of that sort for his wedding, or have so good a place to
bring a wife to.

PATRICK [_who is still at the window_].

There’s an old woman coming down the road. I don’t know is it here she
is coming?

BRIDGET.

It will be a neighbour coming to hear about Michael’s wedding. Can you
see who it is?

PATRICK.

I think it is a stranger, but she’s not coming to the house. She’s
turned into the gap that goes down where Murteen and his sons are
shearing sheep. [_He turns towards BRIDGET._] Do you remember what
Winny of the Cross Roads was saying the other night about the strange
woman that goes through the country whatever time there’s war or
trouble coming?

BRIDGET.

Don’t be bothering us about Winny’s talk, but go and open the door for
your brother. I hear him coming up the path.

PETER.

I hope he has brought Delia’s fortune with him safe, for fear her
people might go back on the bargain and I after making it. Trouble
enough I had making it.

    [_PATRICK opens the door and MICHAEL comes in._

BRIDGET.

What kept you, Michael? We were looking out for you this long time.

MICHAEL.

I went round by the priest’s house to bid him be ready to marry us
to-morrow.

BRIDGET.

Did he say anything?

MICHAEL.

He said it was a very nice match, and that he was never better pleased
to marry any two in his parish than myself and Delia Cahel.

PETER.

Have you got the fortune, Michael?

MICHAEL.

Here it is.

    [_MICHAEL puts bag on table and goes over and leans
    against chimney-jamb. BRIDGET, who has been all this
    time examining the clothes, pulling the seams and
    trying the lining of the pockets, etc., puts the
    clothes on the dresser._

PETER.

    [_Getting up and taking the bag in his hand and turning
    out the money._]

Yes, I made the bargain well for you, Michael. Old John Cahel would
sooner have kept a share of this a while longer. ‘Let me keep the half
of it until the first boy is born,’ says he. ‘You will not,’ says I.
‘Whether there is or is not a boy, the whole hundred pounds must be in
Michael’s hands before he brings your daughter to the house.’ The wife
spoke to him then, and he gave in at the end.

BRIDGET.

You seem well pleased to be handling the money, Peter.

PETER.

Indeed, I wish I had had the luck to get a hundred pounds, or twenty
pounds itself, with the wife I married.

BRIDGET.

Well, if I didn’t bring much I didn’t get much. What had you the day I
married you but a flock of hens and you feeding them, and a few lambs
and you driving them to the market at Ballina. [_She is vexed and bangs
a jug on the dresser._] If I brought no fortune I worked it out in my
bones, laying down the baby, Michael that is standing there now, on a
stook of straw, while I dug the potatoes, and never asking big dresses
or anything but to be working.

PETER.

That is true, indeed. [_He pats her arm._

BRIDGET.

Leave me alone now till I ready the house for the woman that is to come
into it.

PETER.

You are the best woman in Ireland, but money is good, too. [_He begins
handling the money again and sits down._] I never thought to see so
much money within my four walls. We can do great things now we have
it. We can take the ten acres of land we have a chance of since Jamsie
Dempsey died, and stock it. We will go to the fair of Ballina to buy
the stock. Did Delia ask any of the money for her own use, Michael?

MICHAEL.

She did not, indeed. She did not seem to take much notice of it, or to
look at it at all.

BRIDGET.

That’s no wonder. Why would she look at it when she had yourself to
look at, a fine, strong young man? it is proud she must be to get you;
a good steady boy that will make use of the money, and not be running
through it or spending it on drink like another.

PETER.

It’s likely Michael himself was not thinking much of the fortune
either, but of what sort the girl was to look at.

MICHAEL [_coming over towards the table_].

Well, you would like a nice comely girl to be beside you, and to go
walking with you. The fortune only lasts for a while, but the woman
will be there always.

PATRICK [_turning round from the window_].

They are cheering again down in the town. Maybe they are landing horses
from Enniscrone. They do be cheering when the horses take the water
well.

MICHAEL.

There are no horses in it. Where would they be going and no fair at
hand? Go down to the town, Patrick, and see what is going on.

PATRICK.

    [_Opens the door to go out, but stops for a moment on
    the threshold._]

Will Delia remember, do you think, to bring the greyhound pup she
promised me when she would be coming to the house?

MICHAEL.

She will surely.

    [_PATRICK goes out, leaving the door open._

PETER.

It will be Patrick’s turn next to be looking for a fortune, but he
won’t find it so easy to get it and he with no place of his own.

BRIDGET.

I do be thinking sometimes, now things are going so well with us, and
the Cahels such a good back to us in the district, and Delia’s own
uncle a priest, we might be put in the way of making Patrick a priest
some day, and he so good at his books.

PETER.

Time enough, time enough, you have always your head full of plans,
Bridget.

BRIDGET.

We will be well able to give him learning, and not to send him tramping
the country like a poor scholar that lives on charity.

MICHAEL.

They’re not done cheering yet.

    [_He goes over to the door and stands there for a
    moment, putting up his hand to shade his eyes._

BRIDGET.

Do you see anything?

MICHAEL.

I see an old woman coming up the path.

BRIDGET.

Who is it, I wonder? It must be the strange woman Patrick saw a while
ago.

MICHAEL.

I don’t think it’s one of the neighbours anyway, but she has her cloak
over her face.

BRIDGET.

It might be some poor woman heard we were making ready for the wedding
and came to look for her share.

PETER.

I may as well put the money out of sight. There is no use leaving it
out for every stranger to look at.

    [_He goes over to a large box in the corner, opens it
    and puts the bag in and fumbles at the lock._

MICHAEL.

There she is, father! [_An _Old Woman_ passes the window slowly, she
looks at MICHAEL as she passes._] I’d sooner a stranger not to come to
the house the night before my wedding.

BRIDGET.

Open the door, Michael; don’t keep the poor woman waiting.

    [_The OLD WOMAN comes in. MICHAEL stands aside to make
    way for her._

OLD WOMAN.

God save all here!

PETER.

God save you kindly!

OLD WOMAN.

You have good shelter here.

PETER.

You are welcome to whatever shelter we have.

BRIDGET.

Sit down there by the fire and welcome.

OLD WOMAN [_warming her hands_].

There is a hard wind outside.

    [_MICHAEL watches her curiously from the door. PETER
    comes over to the table._

PETER.

Have you travelled far to-day?

OLD WOMAN.

I have travelled far, very far; there are few have travelled so far as
myself, and there’s many a one that doesn’t make me welcome. There was
one that had strong sons I thought were friends of mine, but they were
shearing their sheep, and they wouldn’t listen to me.

PETER.

It’s a pity indeed for any person to have no place of their own.

OLD WOMAN.

That’s true for you indeed, and it’s long I’m on the roads since I
first went wandering.

BRIDGET.

It is a wonder you are not worn out with so much wandering.

OLD WOMAN.

Sometimes my feet are tired and my hands are quiet, but there is no
quiet in my heart. When the people see me quiet, they think old age
has come on me and that all the stir has gone out of me. But when the
trouble is on me I must be talking to my friends.

BRIDGET.

What was it put you wandering?

OLD WOMAN.

Too many strangers in the house.

BRIDGET.

Indeed you look as if you’d had your share of trouble.

OLD WOMAN.

I have had trouble indeed.

BRIDGET.

What was it put the trouble on you?

OLD WOMAN.

My land that was taken from me.

PETER.

Was it much land they took from you?

OLD WOMAN.

My four beautiful green fields.

PETER [_aside to BRIDGET_].

Do you think could she be the widow Casey that was put out of her
holding at Kilglass a while ago?

BRIDGET.

She is not. I saw the widow Casey one time at the market in Ballina, a
stout fresh woman.

PETER [_to OLD WOMAN_].

Did you hear a noise of cheering, and you coming up the hill?

OLD WOMAN.

I thought I heard the noise I used to hear when my friends came to
visit me.

    [_She begins singing half to herself._

    I will go cry with the woman,
    For yellow-haired Donough is dead,
    With a hempen rope for a neckcloth,
    And a white cloth on his head,——

MICHAEL [_coming from the door_].

What is that you are singing, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

Singing I am about a man I knew one time, yellow-haired Donough that
was hanged in Galway. [_She goes on singing, much louder._

    I am come to cry with you, woman,
    My hair is unwound and unbound;
    I remember him ploughing his field,
    Turning up the red side of the ground,

    And building his barn on the hill
    With the good mortared stone;
    O! we’d have pulled down the gallows
    Had it happened in Enniscrone!

MICHAEL.

What was it brought him to his death?

OLD WOMAN.

He died for love of me: many a man has died for love of me.

PETER [_aside to BRIDGET_].

Her trouble has put her wits astray.

MICHAEL.

Is it long since that song was made? Is it long since he got his death?

OLD WOMAN.

Not long, not long. But there were others that died for love of me a
long time ago.

MICHAEL.

Were they neighbours of your own, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

Come here beside me and I’ll tell you about them. [_MICHAEL sits down
beside her at the hearth._] There was a red man of the O’Donnells from
the north, and a man of the O’Sullivans from the south, and there was
one Brian that lost his life at Clontarf by the sea, and there were a
great many in the west, some that died hundreds of years ago, and there
are some that will die to-morrow.

MICHAEL.

Is it in the west that men will die to-morrow?

OLD WOMAN.

Come nearer, nearer to me.

BRIDGET.

Is she right, do you think? Or is she a woman from beyond the world?

PETER.

She doesn’t know well what she’s talking about, with the want and the
trouble she has gone through.

BRIDGET.

The poor thing, we should treat her well.

PETER.

Give her a drink of milk and a bit of the oaten cake.

BRIDGET.

Maybe we should give her something along with that, to bring her on her
way. A few pence or a shilling itself, and we with so much money in the
house.

PETER.

Indeed I’d not begrudge it to her if we had it to spare, but if we go
running through what we have, we’ll soon have to break the hundred
pounds, and that would be a pity.

BRIDGET.

Shame on you, Peter. Give her the shilling and your blessing with it,
or our own luck will go from us.

    [_PETER goes to the box and takes out a shilling._

BRIDGET [_to the OLD WOMAN_].

Will you have a drink of milk, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

It is not food or drink that I want.

PETER [_offering the shilling_].

Here is something for you.

OLD WOMAN.

This is not what I want. It is not silver I want.

PETER.

What is it you would be asking for?

OLD WOMAN.

If anyone would give me help he must give me himself, he must give me
all.

    [_PETER goes over to the table staring at the shilling
    in his hand in a bewildered way, and stands whispering
    to BRIDGET._

MICHAEL.

Have you no one to care you in your age, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

I have not. With all the lovers that brought me their love, I never set
out the bed for any.

MICHAEL.

Are you lonely going the roads, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

I have my thoughts and I have my hopes.

MICHAEL.

What hopes have you to hold to?

OLD WOMAN.

The hope of getting my beautiful fields back again; the hope of putting
the strangers out of my house.

MICHAEL.

What way will you do that, ma’am?

OLD WOMAN.

I have good friends that will help me. They are gathering to help me
now. I am not afraid. If they are put down to-day they will get the
upper hand to-morrow. [_She gets up._] I must be going to meet my
friends. They are coming to help me and I must be there to welcome
them. I must call the neighbours together to welcome them.

MICHAEL.

I will go with you.

BRIDGET.

It is not her friends you have to go and welcome, Michael; it is the
girl coming into the house you have to welcome. You have plenty to do,
it is food and drink you have to bring to the house. The woman that is
coming home is not coming with empty hands; you would not have an empty
house before her. [_To the OLD WOMAN._] Maybe you don’t know, ma’am,
that my son is going to be married to-morrow.

OLD WOMAN.

It is not a man going to his marriage that I look to for help.

PETER [_to BRIDGET_].

Who is she, do you think, at all?

BRIDGET.

You did not tell us your name yet, ma’am.

OLD WOMAN.

Some call me the Poor Old Woman, and there are some that call me
Cathleen, the daughter of Houlihan.

PETER.

I think I knew someone of that name once. Who was it, I wonder? It must
have been someone I knew when I was a boy. No, no; I remember, I heard
it in a song.

OLD WOMAN.

    [_Who is standing in the doorway._]

They are wondering that there were songs made for me; there have been
many songs made for me. I heard one on the wind this morning.

    [_Sings._] Do not make a great keening
               When the graves have been dug to-morrow.
               Do not call the white-scarfed riders
               To the burying that shall be to-morrow.
               Do not spread food to call strangers
               To the wakes that shall be to-morrow;
               Do not give money for prayers
               For the dead that shall die to-morrow ...

they will have no need of prayers, they will have no need of prayers.

MICHAEL.

I do not know what that song means, but tell me something I can do for
you.

PETER.

Come over to me, Michael.

MICHAEL.

Hush, father, listen to her.

OLD WOMAN.

It is a hard service they take that help me. Many that are red-cheeked
now will be pale-cheeked; many that have been free to walk the hills
and the bogs and the rushes, will be sent to walk hard streets in far
countries; many a good plan will be broken; many that have gathered
money will not stay to spend it; many a child will be born and there
will be no father at its christening to give it a name. They that had
red cheeks will have pale cheeks for my sake; and for all that, they
will think they are well paid.

    [_She goes out; her voice is heard outside singing._

    They shall be remembered for ever,
    They shall be alive for ever,
    They shall be speaking for ever,
    The people shall hear them for ever.

BRIDGET [_to PETER_].

Look at him, Peter; he has the look of a man that has got the touch.
[_Raising her voice._] Look here, Michael, at the wedding clothes.
Such grand clothes as these are! You have a right to fit them on now,
it would be a pity to-morrow if they did not fit. The boys would be
laughing at you. Take them, Michael, and go into the room and fit them
on.

    [_She puts them on his arm._

MICHAEL.

What wedding are you talking of? What clothes will I be wearing
to-morrow?

BRIDGET.

These are the clothes you are going to wear when you marry Delia Cahel
to-morrow.

MICHAEL.

I had forgotten that.

    [_He looks at the clothes and turns towards the inner
    room, but stops at the sound of cheering outside._

PETER.

There is the shouting come to our own door. What is it has happened?

    [Neighbours_ come crowding in, PATRICK and DELIA with
    them._

PATRICK.

There are ships in the Bay; the French are landing at Killala!

    [_PETER takes his pipe from his mouth and his hat off
    and stands up. The clothes slip from MICHAEL’S arm._

DELIA.

Michael! [_He takes no notice._] Michael! [_He turns towards her._] Why
do you look at me like a stranger?

    [_She drops his arm. BRIDGET goes over towards her._

PATRICK.

The boys are all hurrying down the hill-sides to join the French.

DELIA.

Michael won’t be going to join the French.

BRIDGET [_to PETER_].

Tell him not to go, Peter.

PETER.

It’s no use. He doesn’t hear a word we’re saying.

BRIDGET.

Try and coax him over to the fire.

DELIA.

Michael, Michael! You won’t leave me! You won’t join the French, and we
going to be married!

    [_She puts her arms about him, he turns towards her as
    if about to yield._

OLD WOMAN’S _voice outside_.

    They shall be speaking for ever,
    The people shall hear them for ever.

    [_MICHAEL breaks away from DELIA, stands for a second
    at the door, then rushes out, following the OLD WOMAN’S
    voice. BRIDGET takes DELIA, who is crying silently,
    into her arms._

PETER.

    [_To PATRICK, laying a hand on his arm._]

Did you see an old woman going down the path?

PATRICK.

I did not, but I saw a young girl, and she had the walk of a queen.
﻿THE GOLDEN HELMET




_PERSONS IN THE PLAY_


    CUCHULAIN
    LEAGERIE
    CONAL
    EMER, _Cuchulain’s wife_
    LEAGERIE’S WIFE
    CONAL’S WIFE
    LAEG, _Cuchulain’s chariot-driver_
    RED MAN
    HORSEBOYS AND SCULLIONS
    THREE BLACK MEN




THE GOLDEN HELMET


    _A house made of logs. There are two windows at the
    back and a door which cuts off one of the corners of
    the room. Through the door one can see rocks, which
    make the ground outside the door higher than it is
    within, and the sea. Through the windows one can see
    nothing but the sea. There are three great chairs at
    the opposite side to the door, with a table before
    them. There are cups and a flagon of ale on the table._

    _At the Abbey Theatre the house is orange red, and the
    chairs, tables and flagons black, with a slight purple
    tinge which is not clearly distinguishable from the
    black. The rocks are black, with a few green touches.
    The sea is green and luminous, and all the characters,
    except the RED MAN and the _Black Men_ are dressed in
    various tints of green, one or two with touches of
    purple which looks nearly black. The _Black Men_ are
    in dark purple and the RED MAN is altogether dressed
    in red. He is very tall and his height is increased by
    horns on the Golden Helmet. The Helmet has in reality
    more dark green than gold about it. The _Black Men_
    have cats’ heads painted on their black cloth caps. The
    effect is intentionally violent and startling._

CONAL.

Not a sail, not a wave, and if the sea were not purring a little like a
cat, not a sound. There is no danger yet. I can see a long way for the
moonlight is on the sea. [_A horn sounds._

LEAGERIE.

Ah, there is something.

CONAL.

It must be from the land, and it is from the sea that danger comes. We
need not be afraid of anything that comes from the land. [_Looking out
of door._] I cannot see anybody, the rocks and the trees hide a great
part of the pathway upon that side.

LEAGERIE [_sitting at table_].

It sounded like Cuchulain’s horn, but that’s not possible.

CONAL.

Yes, that’s impossible. He will never come home from Scotland. He
has all he wants there. Luck in all he does. Victory and wealth and
happiness flowing in on him, while here at home all goes to rack, and a
man’s good name drifts away between night and morning.

LEAGERIE.

I wish he would come home for all that, and put quiet and respect for
those that are more than she is into that young wife of his. Only this
very night your wife and my wife had to forbid her to go into the
dining-hall before them. She is young, and she is Cuchulain’s wife, and
so she must spread her tail like a peacock.

CONAL [_at door_].

I can see the horn-blower now, a young man wrapped in a cloak.

LEAGERIE.

Do not let him come in. Tell him to go elsewhere for shelter. This is
no place to seek shelter in.

CONAL.

That is right. I will tell him to go away, for nobody must know the
disgrace that is to fall upon Ireland this night.

LEAGERIE.

Nobody of living men but us two must ever know that.

CONAL [_outside door_].

Go away, go away!

    [_A YOUNG MAN covered by a long cloak is standing upon
    the rocks outside door._

YOUNG MAN.

I am a traveller, and I am looking for sleep and food.

CONAL.

A law has been made that nobody is to come into this house to-night.

YOUNG MAN.

Who made that law?

CONAL.

We two made it, and who has so good a right? for we have to guard
this house and to keep it from robbery, and from burning and from
enchantment.

YOUNG MAN.

Then I will unmake the law. Out of my way!

    [_He struggles with CONAL and shoves past into the
    house._

CONAL.

I thought no living man but Leagerie could have stood against me; and
Leagerie himself could not have shoved past me. What is more, no living
man could if I were not taken by surprise. How could I expect to find
so great a strength?

LEAGERIE.

Go out of this: there is another house a little further along the
shore; our wives are there with their servants, and they will give you
food and drink.

YOUNG MAN.

It is in this house I will have food and drink.

LEAGERIE [_drawing his sword_].

Go out of this, or I will make you.

    [_The YOUNG MAN seizes LEAGERIE’S arm, and thrusting
    it up, passes him, and puts his shield over the chair
    where there is an empty place._

YOUNG MAN [_at table_].

It is here I will spend the night, but I won’t tell you why till I
have drunk. I am thirsty. What, the flagon full and the cups empty and
Leagerie and Conal there! Why, what’s in the wind that Leagerie and
Conal cannot drink?

LEAGERIE.

It is Cuchulain.

CONAL.

Better go away to Scotland again, or if you stay here ask no one what
has happened or what is going to happen.

CUCHULAIN.

What more is there that can happen so strange as that I should come
home after years and that you should bid me begone?

CONAL.

I tell you that this is no fit house to welcome you, for it is a
disgraced house.

CUCHULAIN.

What is it you are hinting at? You were sitting there with ale beside
you and the door open, and quarrelsome thoughts. You are waiting for
something or someone. It is for some messenger who is to bring you to
some spoil, or to some adventure that you will keep for yourselves.

LEAGERIE.

Better tell him, for he has such luck that it may be his luck will
amend ours.

CONAL.

Yes, I had better tell him, for even now at this very door we saw what
luck he had. He had the slope of the ground to help him. Is the sea
quiet?

LEAGERIE [_looks out of window_].

There is nothing stirring.

CONAL.

Cuchulain, a little after you went out of this country we were sitting
here drinking. We were merry. It was late, close on to midnight, when a
strange-looking man with red hair and a great sword in his hand came in
through that door. He asked for ale and we gave it to him, for we were
tired of drinking with one another. He became merry, and for every joke
we made he made a better, and presently we all three got up and danced,
and then we sang, and then he said he would show us a new game. He said
he would stoop down and that one of us was to cut off his head, and
afterwards one of us, or whoever had a mind for the game, was to stoop
down and have his head whipped off. ‘You take off my head,’ said he,
‘and then I take off his head, and that will be a bargain and a debt
between us. A head for a head, that is the game,’ said he. We laughed
at him and told him he was drunk, for how could he whip off a head when
his own had been whipped off? Then he began abusing us and calling
us names, so I ran at him and cut his head off, and the head went on
laughing where it lay, and presently he caught it up in his hands and
ran out and plunged into the sea.

CUCHULAIN [_laughs_].

I have imagined as good, when I had as much ale, and believed it too.

LEAGERIE [_at table_].

I tell you, Cuchulain, you never did. You never imagined a story like
this.

CONAL.

Why must you be always putting yourself up against Leagerie and myself?
and what is more, it was no imagination at all. We said to ourselves
that all came out of the flagon, and we laughed, and we said we will
tell nobody about it. We made an oath to tell nobody. But twelve months
after when we were sitting by this table, the flagon between us—

LEAGERIE.

But full up to the brim—

CONAL.

The thought of that story had put us from our drinking—

LEAGERIE.

We were telling it over to one another—

CONAL.

Suddenly that man came in with his head on his shoulders again, and the
big sword in his hand. He asked for payment of his debt, and because
neither I nor Leagerie would let him cut off our heads he began abusing
us and making little of us, and saying that we were a disgrace, and
that all Ireland was disgraced because of us. We had not a word to say.

LEAGERIE.

If you had been here you would have been as silent as we were.

CONAL.

At last he said he would come again in twelve months and give us one
more chance to keep our word and pay our debt. After that he went down
into the sea again. Will he tell the whole world of the disgrace that
has come upon us, do you think?

CUCHULAIN.

Whether he does or does not, we will stand there in the door with our
swords out and drive him down to the sea again.

CONAL.

What is the use of fighting with a man whose head laughs when it has
been cut off?

LEAGERIE.

We might run away, but he would follow us everywhere.

CONAL.

He is coming; the sea is beginning to splash and rumble as it did
before he came the last time.

CUCHULAIN.

Let us shut the door and put our backs against it.

LEAGERIE.

It is too late. Look, there he is at the door. He is standing on the
threshold.

    [_A MAN dressed in red, with a great sword and red
    ragged hair, and having a Golden Helmet on his head, is
    standing on the threshold._

CUCHULAIN.

Go back into the sea, old red head! If you will take off heads,
take off the head of the sea turtle of Muirthemne, or of the pig
of Connaught that has a moon in his belly, or of that old juggler
Manannan, son of the sea, or of the red man of the Boyne, or of the
King of the Cats, for they are of your own sort, and it may be they
understand your ways. Go, I say, for when a man’s head is off it does
not grow again. What are you standing there for? Go down, I say. If I
cannot harm you with the sword I will put you down into the sea with my
hands. Do you laugh at me, old red head? Go down before I lay my hands
upon you.

RED MAN.

So you also believe I was in earnest when I asked for a man’s head?
It was but a drinker’s joke, an old juggling feat, to pass the time.
I am the best of all drinkers and tipsy companions, the kindest there
is among the Shape-changers of the world. Look, I have brought this
Golden Helmet as a gift. It is for you or for Leagerie or for Conal,
for the best man, and the bravest fighting-man amongst you, and you
yourselves shall choose the man. Leagerie is brave, and Conal is brave.
They risk their lives in battle, but they were not brave enough for my
jokes and my juggling. [_He lays the Golden Helmet on the ground._]
Have I been too grim a joker? Well, I am forgiven now, for there is the
Helmet, and let the strongest take it.

    [_He goes out._

CONAL [_taking Helmet_].

It is my right. I am a year older than Leagerie, and I have fought in
more battles.

LEAGERIE [_strutting about stage, sings_].

    Leagerie of the Battles
    Has put to the sword
    The cat-headed men
    And carried away
    Their hidden gold.

    [_He snatches Helmet at the last word._

CONAL.

Give it back to me, I say. What was the treasure but withered leaves
when you got to your own door?

CUCHULAIN.

    [_Taking the Helmet from LEAGERIE._]

Give it to me, I say.

CONAL.

You are too young, Cuchulain. What deeds have you to be set beside our
deeds?

CUCHULAIN.

I have not taken it for myself. It will belong to us all equally. [_He
goes to table and begins filling Helmet with ale._] We will pass it
round and drink out of it turn about and no one will be able to claim
that it belongs to him more than another. I drink to your wife, Conal,
and to your wife, Leagerie, and I drink to Emer my own wife. [_Shouting
and blowing of horns in the distance._] What is that noise?

CONAL.

It is the horseboys and the huntboys and the scullions quarrelling.
I know the sound, for I have heard it often of late. It is a good
thing that you are home, Cuchulain, for it is your own horseboy and
chariot-driver, Laeg, that is the worst of all, and now you will keep
him quiet. They take down the great hunting-horns when they cannot
drown one another’s voices by shouting. There—there—do you hear them
now? [_Shouting so as to be heard above the noise._] I drink to your
good health, Cuchulain, and to your young wife, though it were well if
she did not quarrel with my wife.

    _Many men, among whom is LAEG, chariot-driver of
    CUCHULAIN, come in with great horns of many fantastic
    shapes._

LAEG.

I am Cuchulain’s chariot-driver, and I say that my master is the best.

ANOTHER.

He is not, but Leagerie is.

ANOTHER.

No, but Conal is.

LAEG.

Make them listen to me, Cuchulain.

ANOTHER.

No, but listen to me.

LAEG.

When I said Cuchulain should have the Helmet, they blew the horns.

ANOTHER.

Conal has it. The best man has it.

CUCHULAIN.

Silence, all of you. What is all this uproar, Laeg, and who began it?

    [_The _Scullions_ and the _Horseboys_ point at LAEG and
    cry, ‘_He began it_.’ They keep up an all but continual
    murmur through what follows._

LAEG.

A man with a red beard came where we were sitting, and as he passed me
he cried out that they were taking a golden helmet or some such thing
from you and denying you the championship of Ireland. I stood up on
that and I cried out that you were the best of the men of Ireland. But
the others cried for Leagerie or Conal, and because I have a big voice
they got down the horns to drown my voice, and as neither I nor they
would keep silent we have come here to settle it. I demand that the
Helmet be taken from Conal and be given to you.

    [_The _Horseboys_ and the _Scullions_ shout, ‘_No, no;
    give it to Leagerie_,’ ‘_The best man has it_,’ etc._

CUCHULAIN.

It has not been given to Conal or to anyone. I have made it into a
drinking-cup that it may belong to all. I drank and then Conal drank.
Give it to Leagerie, Conal, that he may drink. That will make them see
that it belongs to all of us.

A SCULLION OR HORSEBOY.

Cuchulain is right.

ANOTHER.

Cuchulain is right, and I am tired blowing on the big horn.

LAEG.

Cuchulain, you drank first.

ANOTHER.

He gives it to Leagerie now, but he has taken the honour of it for
himself. Did you hear him say he drank the first? He claimed to be the
best by drinking first.

ANOTHER.

Did Cuchulain drink the first?

LAEG [_triumphantly_].

You drank the first, Cuchulain.

CONAL.

Did you claim to be better than us by drinking first?

    [_LEAGERIE and CONAL draw their swords._

CUCHULAIN.

Is it that old dried herring, that old red juggler who has made us
quarrel for his own comfort? [_The _Horseboys_ and the _Scullions_
murmur excitedly._] He gave the Helmet to set us by the ears, and
because we would not quarrel over it, he goes to Laeg and tells him
that I am wronged. Who knows where he is now, or who he is stirring up
to make mischief between us? Go back to your work and do not stir from
it whatever noise comes to you or whatever shape shows itself.

A SCULLION.

Cuchulain is right. I am tired blowing on the big horn.

CUCHULAIN.

Go in silence.

    [_The _Scullions_ and _Horseboys_ turn towards
    the door, but stand still on hearing the voice of
    LEAGERIE’S WIFE outside the door._

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

My man is the best. I will go in the first. I will go in the first.

EMER.

My man is the best, and I will go in first.

CONAL’S WIFE.

No, for my man is the best, and it is I that should go first.

    [_LEAGERIE’S WIFE and CONAL’S WIFE struggle in the
    doorway._


_LEAGERIE’S WIFE sings._

    My man is the best.
    What other has fought
    The cat-headed men
    That mew in the sea
    And carried away
    Their long-hidden gold?
    They struck with their claws
    And bit with their teeth,
    But Leagerie my husband
    Put all to the sword.

CONAL’S WIFE.

    [_Putting her hand over the other’s mouth and getting
    in front of her._]

    My husband has fought
    With strong men in armour.
    Had he a quarrel
    With cats, it is certain
    He’d war with none
    But the stout and heavy
    With good claws on them.
    What glory in warring
    With hollow shadows
    That helplessly mew?

EMER.

    [_Thrusting herself between them and forcing both of
    them back with her hands._]

I am Emer, wife of Cuchulain, and no one shall go in front of me, or
sing in front of me, or praise any that I have not a mind to hear
praised.

    [_CUCHULAIN puts his spear across the door._

CUCHULAIN.

All of our three wives shall come in together, and by three doors equal
in height and in breadth and in honour. Break down the bottoms of the
windows.

    [_While CONAL and LEAGERIE are breaking down the
    bottoms of the windows each of their wives goes to the
    window where her husband is._

    _While the windows are being broken down EMER sings._

    My man is the best.
    And Conal’s wife
    And the wife of Leagerie
    Know that they lie
    When they praise their own
    Out of envy of me.
    My man is the best,
    First for his own sake,
    Being the bravest
    And handsomest man
    And the most beloved
    By the women of Ireland
    That envy me,
    And then for his wife’s sake
    Because I’m the youngest
    And handsomest queen.

    [_When the windows have been made into doors, CUCHULAIN
    takes his spear from the door where EMER is, and all
    three come in at the same moment._

EMER.

I am come to praise you and to put courage into you, Cuchulain, as a
wife should, that they may not take the championship of the men of
Ireland from you.

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

You lie, Emer, for it is Cuchulain and Conal who are taking the
championship from my husband.

CONAL’S WIFE.

Cuchulain has taken it.

CUCHULAIN.

Townland against townland, barony against barony, kingdom against
kingdom, province against province, and if there be but two door-posts
to a door the one fighting against the other. [_He takes up the Helmet
which LEAGERIE had laid down upon the table when he went to break out
the bottom of the window._] This Helmet will bring no more wars into
Ireland. [_He throws it into the sea._]

LEAGERIE’S WIFE.

You have done that to rob my husband.

CONAL’S WIFE.

You could not keep it for yourself, and so you threw it away that
nobody else might have it.

CONAL.

You should not have done that, Cuchulain.

LEAGERIE.

You have done us a great wrong.

EMER.

Who is for Cuchulain?

CUCHULAIN.

Let no one stir.

EMER.

Who is for Cuchulain, I say?

    [_She draws her dagger from her belt and sings the same
    words as before, flourishing it about. While she has
    been singing, CONAL’S WIFE and LEAGERIE’S WIFE have
    drawn their daggers and run at her to kill her, but
    CUCHULAIN has forced them back. CONAL and LEAGERIE have
    drawn their swords to strike CUCHULAIN._

CONAL’S WIFE.

    [_While EMER is still singing._]

Silence her voice, silence her voice, blow the horns, make a noise!

    [_The _Scullions_ and _Horseboys_ blow their horns or
    fight among themselves. There is a deafening noise and
    a confused fight. Suddenly three black hands holding
    extinguishers come through the window and extinguish
    the torches. It is now pitch dark but for a very faint
    light outside the house which merely shows that there
    are moving forms, but not who or what they are, and in
    the darkness one can hear low terrified voices._

FIRST VOICE.

Did you see them putting out the torches?

ANOTHER VOICE.

They came up out of the sea, three black men.

ANOTHER VOICE.

They have heads of cats upon them.

ANOTHER VOICE.

They came up mewing out of the sea.

ANOTHER VOICE.

How dark it is! one of them has put his hand over the moon.

    [_A light gradually comes into the windows as if
    shining from the sea. The RED MAN is seen standing in
    the midst of the house._

RED MAN.

I demand the debt that is owing. I demand that some man shall stoop
down that I may cut his head off as my head was cut off. If my debt is
not paid, no peace shall come to Ireland, and Ireland shall lie weak
before her enemies. But if my debt is paid there shall be peace.

CUCHULAIN.

The quarrels of Ireland shall end. What is one man’s life? I will pay
the debt with my own head. [_EMER wails._] Do not cry out, Emer, for
if I were not myself, if I were not Cuchulain, one of those that God
has made reckless, the women of Ireland had not loved me, and you had
not held your head so high. [_He stoops, bending his head. Three _Black
Men_ come to the door. Two hold torches, and one stooping between them
holds up the Golden Helmet. The RED MAN gives one of the _Black Men_
his sword and takes the Helmet._] What do you wait for, old man? Come,
raise up your sword!

RED MAN.

I will not harm you, Cuchulain. I am the guardian of this land, and
age after age I come up out of the sea to try the men of Ireland. I
give you the championship because you are without fear, and you shall
win many battles with laughing lips and endure wounding and betrayal
without bitterness of heart; and when men gaze upon you, their hearts
shall grow greater and their minds clear; until the day come when I
darken your mind, that there may be an end to the story, and a song on
the harp-string.
﻿
                       THE DREAMING OF THE BONES


The stage is any bare place in a room close to the wall. A screen with
a pattern of mountain and sky can stand against the wall, or a curtain
with a like pattern hang upon it, but the pattern must only symbolize
or suggest. One musician enters and then two others, the first stands
singing while the others take their places. Then all three sit down
against the wall by their instruments, which are already there--a drum,
a zither, and a flute. Or they unfold a cloth as in 'The Hawk's Well,'
while the instruments are carried in.

FIRST MUSICIAN

            (or all three musicians, singing)
  Why does my heart beat so?
  Did not a shadow pass?
  It passed but a moment ago.
  Who can have trod in the grass?
  What rogue is night-wandering?
  Have not old writers said
  That dizzy dreams can spring
  From the dry bones of the dead?
  And many a night it seems
  That all the valley fills
  With those fantastic dreams.
  They overflow the hills,
  So passionate is a shade,
  Like wine that fills to the top
  A grey-green cup of jade,
  Or maybe an agate cup.
  (speaking) The hour before dawn and the moon covered up.
  The little village of Abbey is covered up;
  The little narrow trodden way that runs
  From the white road to the Abbey of Corcomroe
  Is covered up; and all about the hills
  Are like a circle of Agate or of Jade.
  Somewhere among great rocks on the scarce grass
  Birds cry, they cry their loneliness.
  Even the sunlight can be lonely here,
  Even hot noon is lonely. I hear a footfall--
  A young man with a lantern comes this way.
  He seems an Aran fisher, for he wears
  The flannel bawneen and the cow-hide shoe.
  He stumbles wearily, and stumbling prays.

  (A young man enters, praying in Irish)

  Once more the birds cry in their loneliness,
  But now they wheel about our heads; and now
  They have dropped on the grey stone to the north-east.

  (A man and a girl both in the costume of a past time, come in. They
  wear heroic masks)

YOUNG MAN

                        (raising his lantern)
  Who is there? I cannot see what you are like,
  Come to the light.

STRANGER

                   But what have you to fear?

YOUNG MAN

  And why have you come creeping through the dark.

  (The Girl blows out lantern)

  The wind has blown my lantern out. Where are you?
  I saw a pair of heads against the sky
  And lost them after, but you are in the right
  I should not be afraid in County Clare;
  And should be or should not be have no choice,
  I have to put myself into your hands,
  Now that my candle's out.

STRANGER

                   You have fought in Dublin?

YOUNG MAN

  I was in the Post Office, and if taken
  I shall be put against a wall and shot.

STRANGER

  You know some place of refuge, have some plan
  Or friend who will come to meet you?

YOUNG MAN

                                  I am to lie
  At daybreak on the mountain and keep watch
  Until an Aran coracle puts in
  At Muckanish or at the rocky shore
  Under Finvarra, but would break my neck
  If I went stumbling there alone in the dark.

STRANGER

  We know the pathways that the sheep tread out,
  And all the hiding-places of the hills,
  And that they had better hiding-places once.

YOUNG MAN

  You'd say they had better before English robbers
  Cut down the trees or set them upon fire
  For fear their owners might find shelter there.
  What is that sound?

STRANGER

                     An old horse gone astray
  He has been wandering on the road all night.

YOUNG MAN

  I took him for a man and horse. Police
  Are out upon the roads. In the late Rising
  I think there was no man of us but hated
  To fire at soldiers who but did their duty
  And were not of our race, but when a man
  Is born in Ireland and of Irish stock
  When he takes part against us--

STRANGER

                         I will put you safe,
  No living man shall set his eyes upon you.
  I will not answer for the dead.

YOUNG MAN

                                    The dead?

STRANGER

  For certain days the stones where you must lie
  Have in the hour before the break of day
  Been haunted.

YOUNG MAN

              But I was not born at midnight.

STRANGER

  Many a man born in the full daylight
  Can see them plain, will pass them on the high-road
  Or in the crowded market-place of the town,
  And never know that they have passed.

YOUNG MAN

                                   My Grandam
  Would have it they did penance everywhere
  Or lived through their old lives again.

STRANGER

                                  In a dream;
  And some for an old scruple must hang spitted
  Upon the swaying tops of lofty trees;
  Some are consumed in fire, some withered up
  By hail and sleet out of the wintry North,
  And some but live through their old lives again.

YOUNG MAN

  Well, let them dream into what shape they please
  And fill waste mountains with the invisible tumult
  Of the fantastic conscience. I have no dread;
  They cannot put me into jail or shoot me,
  And seeing that their blood has returned to fields
  That have grown red from drinking blood like mine
  They would not if they could betray.

STRANGER

                                 This pathway
  Runs to the ruined Abbey of Corcomroe;
  The Abbey passed, we are soon among the stone
  And shall be at the ridge before the cocks
  Of Aughanish or Bailevlehan
  Or grey Aughtmana shake their wings and cry.

  (They go round the stage once)

FIRST MUSICIAN

  (speaking) They've passed the shallow well and the flat stone
  Fouled by the drinking cattle, the narrow lane
  Where mourners for five centuries have carried
  Noble or peasant to his burial.
  An owl is crying out above their heads.
  (singing) Why should the heart take fright
  What sets it beating so?
  The bitter sweetness of the night
  Has made it but a lonely thing.
  Red bird of March, begin to crow,
  Up with the neck and clap the wing,
  Red cock, and crow.

  (They go once round the stage. The first musician speaks.)

  And now they have climbed through the long grassy field
  And passed the ragged thorn trees and the gap
  In the ancient hedge; and the tomb-nested owl
  At the foot's level beats with a vague wing.
  (singing) My head is in a cloud;
  I'd let the whole world go.
  My rascal heart is proud
  Remembering and remembering.
  Red bird of March, begin to crow,
  Up with the neck and clap the wing
  Red cock and crow.

  (They go round the stage. The first musician speaks.)

  They are among the stones above the ash
  Above the briar and thorn and the scarce grass;
  Hidden amid the shadow far below them
  The cat-headed bird is crying out.
  (singing) The dreaming bones cry out
  Because the night winds blow
  And heaven's a cloudy blot;
  Calamity can have its fling.
  Red bird of March begin to crow,
  Up with the neck and clap the wing
  Red cock and crow.

THE STRANGER

  We're almost at the summit and can rest.
  The road is a faint shadow there; and there
  The abbey lies amid its broken tombs.
  In the old days we should have heard a bell
  Calling the monks before day broke to pray;
  And when the day has broken on the ridge,
  The crowing of its cocks.

YOUNG MAN

                            Is there no house
  Famous for sanctity or architectural beauty
  In Clare or Kerry, or in all wide Connacht
  The enemy has not unroofed?

STRANGER

                           Close to the altar
  Broken by wind and frost and worn by time
  Donogh O'Brien has a tomb, a name in Latin.
  He wore fine clothes and knew the secrets of women
  But he rebelled against the King of Thomond
  And died in his youth.

YOUNG MAN

                     And why should he rebel?
  The King of Thomond was his rightful master.
  It was men like Donogh who made Ireland weak--
  My curse on all that troop, and when I die
  I'll leave my body, if I have any choice,
  Far from his ivy tod and his owl; have those
  Who, if your tale is true, work out a penance
  Upon the mountain-top where I am to hide,
  Come from the Abbey graveyard?

THE GIRL

                     They have not that luck,
  But are more lonely, those that are buried there,
  Warred in the heat of the blood; if they were rebels
  Some momentary impulse made them rebels
  Or the comandment of some petty king
  Who hated Thomond. Being but common sinners,
  No callers in of the alien from oversea
  They and their enemies of Thomond's party
  Mix in a brief dream battle above their bones,
  Or make one drove or drift in amity,
  Or in the hurry of the heavenly round
  Forget their earthly names; these are alone
  Being accursed.

YOUNG MAN

                    And if what seems is true
  And there are more upon the other side
  Than on this side of death, many a ghost
  Must meet them face to face and pass the word
  Even upon this grey and desolate hill.

YOUNG GIRL

  Until this hour no ghost or living man
  Has spoken though seven centuries have run
  Since they, weary of life and of men's eyes,
  Flung down their bones in some forgotten place
  Being accursed.

YOUNG MAN

            I have heard that there are souls
  Who, having sinned after a monstrous fashion
  Take on them, being dead, a monstrous image
  To drive the living, should they meet its face,
  Crazy, and be a terror to the dead.

YOUNG GIRL

                                    But these
  Were comely even in their middle life
  And carry, now that they are dead, the image
  Of their first youth, for it was in that youth
  Their sin began.

YOUNG MAN

                 I have heard of angry ghosts
  Who wander in a wilful solitude.

THE GIRL

  These have no thought but love; nor joy
  But that upon the instant when their penance
  Draws to its height and when two hearts are wrung
  Nearest to breaking, if hearts of shadows break,
  His eyes can mix with hers; nor any pang
  That is so bitter as that double glance,
  Being accursed.

YOUNG MAN

           But what is this strange penance--
  That when their eyes have met can wring them most?

THE GIRL

  Though eyes can meet, their lips can never meet.

YOUNG MAN

  And yet it seems they wander side by side.
  But doubtless you would say that when lips meet
  And have not living nerves, it is no meeting.

THE GIRL

  Although they have no blood or living nerves
  Who once lay warm and live the live-long night
  In one another's arms, and know their part
  In life, being now but of the people of dreams,
  Is a dreams part; although they are but shadows
  Hovering between a thorn tree and a stone
  Who have heaped up night on winged night; although
  No shade however harried and consumed
  Would change his own calamity for theirs,
  Their manner of life were blessed could their lips
  A moment meet; but when he has bent his head
  Close to her head or hand would slip in hand
  The memory of their crime flows up between
  And drives them apart.

YOUNG MAN

                      The memory of a crime--
  He took her from a husband's house it may be,
  But does the penance for a passionate sin
  Last for so many centuries?

THE GIRL

                                      No, no,
  The man she chose, the man she was chosen by
  Cared little and cares little from whose house
  They fled towards dawn amid the flights of arrows
  Or that it was a husband's and a king's;
  And how if that were all could she lack friends
  On crowded roads or on the unpeopled hill?
  Helen herself had opened wide the door
  Where night by night she dreams herself awake
  And gathers to her breast a dreaming man.

YOUNG MAN

  What crime can stay so in the memory?
  What crime can keep apart the lips of lovers
  Wandering and alone?

THE GIRL

                           Her king and lover
  Was overthrown in battle by her husband
  And for her sake and for his own, being blind
  And bitter and bitterly in love, he brought
  A foreign army from across the sea.

YOUNG MAN

  You speak of Dermot and of Dervorgilla
  Who brought the Norman in?

THE GIRL

                             Yes, yes I spoke
  Of that most miserable, most accursed pair
  Who sold their country into slavery, and yet
  They were not wholly miserable and accursed
  If somebody of their race at last would say:
  'I have forgiven them.'

YOUNG MAN

                             Oh, never, never
  Will Dermot and Dervorgilla be forgiven.

THE GIRL

  If someone of their race forgave at last
  Lip would be pressed on lip.

YOUNG MAN

                             Oh, never, never
  Will Dermot and Dervorgilla be forgiven.
  You have told your story well, so well indeed
  I could not help but fall into the mood
  And for a while believe that it was true
  Or half believe, but better push on now.
  The horizon to the East is growing bright.

  (They go once round stage)

  So here we're on the summit. I can see
  The Aran Islands, Connemara Hills,
  And Galway in the breaking light; there too
  The enemy has toppled wall and roof
  And torn from ancient walls to boil his pot
  The oaken panelling that had been dear
  To generations of children and old men.
  But for that pair for whom you would have my pardon
  It might be now like Bayeux or like Caen
  Or little Italian town amid its walls
  For though we have neither coal nor iron ore
  To make us rich and cover heaven with smoke
  Our country, if that crime were uncommitted
  Had been most beautiful. Why do you dance?
  Why do you gaze and with so passionate eyes
  One on the other and then turn away
  Covering your eyes and weave it in a dance,
  Who are you? what are you? you are not natural.

THE GIRL

  Seven hundred years our lips have never met.

YOUNG MAN

  Why do you look so strangely at one another,
  So strangely and so sweetly?

THE GIRL

                         Seven hundred years.

YOUNG MAN

  So strangely and so sweetly. All the ruin,
  All, all their handiwork is blown away
  As though the mountain air had blown it away
  Because their eyes have met. They cannot hear,
  Being folded up and hidden in their dance.
  The dance is changing now. They have dropped their eyes,
  They have covered up their eyes as though their hearts
  Had suddenly been broken--never, never
  Shall Dermot and Dervorgilla be forgiven.
  They have drifted in the dance from rock to rock.
  They have raised their hands as though to snatch the sleep
  That lingers always in the abyss of the sky
  Though they can never reach it. A cloud floats up
  And covers all the mountain head in a moment.
  And now it lifts and they are swept away.
  I had almost yielded and forgiven it all--
  This is indeed a place of terrible temptation.

  (The Musicians begin unfolding and folding a black cloth. The First
  Musician comes forward to the front of the stage, at the centre. He
  holds the cloth before him. The other two come one on either side
  and unfold it. They afterwards fold it up in the same way. While it
  is unfolded, the Young Man leaves the stage.)

THE MUSICIANS

I

  (singing) At the grey round of the hill
  Music of a lost kingdom
  Runs, runs and is suddenly still.
  The winds out of Clare-Galway
  Carry it: suddenly it is still.

  I have heard in the night air
  A wandering airy music;
  And moidered in that snare
  A man is lost of a sudden,
  In that sweet wandering snare.

  What finger first began
  Music of a lost kingdom.
  They dreamed that laughed in the sun.
  Dry bones that dream are bitter,
  They dream and darken our sun.

  Those crazy fingers play
  A wandering airy music;
  Our luck is withered away,
  And wheat in the wheat-ear withered,
  And the wind blows it away.

II

  My heart ran wild when it heard
  The curlew cry before dawn
  And the eddying cat-headed bird;
  But now the night is gone.
  I have heard from far below
  The strong March birds a-crow,
  Stretch neck and clap the wing,
  Red cocks, and crow.
﻿
                       THE ONLY JEALOUSY OF EMER


Enter Musicians, who are dressed as in the earlier play. They have the
same musical instruments, which can either be already upon the stage or
be brought in by the First Musician before he stands in the centre with
the cloth between his hands, or by a player when the cloth is unfolded.
The stage as before can be against the wall of any room.

FIRST MUSICIAN

  (During the unfolding and folding of the cloth)

  A woman's beauty is like a white
  Frail bird, like a white sea-bird alone
  At daybreak after stormy night
  Between two furrows upon the ploughed land:
  A sudden storm and it was thrown
  Between dark furrows upon the ploughed land.
  How many centuries spent
  The sedentary soul
  In toils of measurement
  Beyond eagle or mole,
  Beyond hearing or seeing,
  Or Archimedes guess,
  To raise into being
  That loveliness?

  A strange unserviceable thing,
  A fragile, exquisite, pale shell,
  That the vast troubled waters bring
  To the loud sands before day has broken.
  The storm arose and suddenly fell
  Amid the dark before day had broken.
  What death? what discipline?
  What bonds no man could unbind
  Being imagined within
  The labyrinth of the mind?
  What pursuing or fleeing?
  What wounds, what bloody press?
  Dragged into being
  This loveliness.

  (When the cloth is folded again the Musicians take their place
  against wall. The folding of the cloth shows on one side of the
  stage the curtained bed or litter on which lies a man in his
  grave-clothes. He wears an heroic mask. Another man with exactly
  similar clothes and mask crouches near the front. Emer is sitting
  beside the bed.)

FIRST MUSICIAN

  (speaking) I call before the eyes a roof
  With cross-beams darkened by smoke.
  A fisher's net hangs from a beam,
  A long oar lies against the wall.
  I call up a poor fisher's house.
  A man lies dead or swooning,
  That amorous man,
  That amorous, violent man, renowned Cuchulain,
  Queen Emer at his side.
  At her own bidding all the rest have gone.
  But now one comes on hesitating feet,
  Young Eithne Inguba, Cuchulain's mistress.
  She stands a moment in the open door,
  Beyond the open door the bitter sea,
  The shining, bitter sea is crying out,
  (singing) White shell, white wing
  I will not choose for my friend
  A frail unserviceable thing
  That drifts and dreams, and but knows
  That waters are without end
  And that wind blows.

EMER

  (speaking) Come hither, come sit down beside the bed
  You need not be afraid, for I myself
  Sent for you, Eithne Inguba.

EITHNE INGUBA

                                   No, Madam,
  I have too deeply wronged you to sit there.

EMER

  Of all the people in the world we two,
  And we alone, may watch together here,
  Because we have loved him best.

EITHNE INGUBA

                              And is he dead?

EMER

  Although they have dressed him out in his grave-clothes
  And stretched his limbs, Cuchulain is not dead;
  The very heavens when that day's at hand,
  So that his death may not lack ceremony,
  Will throw out fires, and the earth grow red with blood.
  There shall not be a scullion but foreknows it
  Like the world's end.

EITHNE INGUBA

                     How did he come to this?

EMER

  Towards noon in the assembly of the kings
  He met with one who seemed a while most dear.
  The kings stood round; some quarrel was blown up;
  He drove him out and killed him on the shore
  At Baile's tree, and he who was so killed
  Was his own son begot on some wild woman
  When he was young, or so I have heard it said;
  And thereupon, knowing what man he had killed,
  And being mad with sorrow, he ran out;
  And after to his middle in the foam
  With shield before him and with sword in hand,
  He fought the deathless sea. The kings looked on
  And not a king dared stretch an arm, or even
  Dared call his name, but all stood wondering
  In that dumb stupor like cattle in a gale,
  Until at last, as though he had fixed his eyes
  On a new enemy, he waded out
  Until the water had swept over him;
  But the waves washed his senseless image up
  And laid it at this door.

EITHNE INGUBA

                           How pale he looks!

EMER

  He is not dead.

EITHNE INGUBA

                 You have not kissed his lips
  Nor laid his head upon your breast.

EMER

                                    It may be
  An image has been put into his place,
  A sea-born log bewitched into his likeness,
  Or some stark horseman grown too old to ride
  Among the troops of Mananan, Son of the Sea,
  Now that his joints are stiff.

EITHNE INGUBA

                            Cry out his name.
  All that are taken from our sight, they say,
  Loiter amid the scenery of their lives
  For certain hours or days, and should he hear
  He might, being angry drive the changeling out.

EMER

  It is hard to make them hear amid their darkness,
  And it is long since I could call him home;
  I am but his wife, but if you cry aloud
  With that sweet voice that is so dear to him
  He cannot help but listen.

EITHNE INGUBA

                            He loves me best,
  Being his newest love, but in the end
  Will love the woman best who loved him first
  And loved him through the years when love seemed lost.

EMER

  I have that hope, the hope that some day and somewhere
  We'll sit together at the hearth again.

EITHNE INGUBA

  Women like me when the violent hour is over
  Are flung into some corner like old nut shells.
  Cuchulain, listen.

EMER

                        No, not yet for first
  I'll cover up his face to hide the sea;
  And throw new logs upon the hearth and stir
  The half burnt logs until they break in flame.
  Old Mananan's unbridled horses come
  Out of the sea and on their backs his horsemen
  But all the enchantments of the dreaming foam
  Dread the hearth fire.

  (She pulls the curtains of the bed so as to hide the sick man's
  face, that the actor may change his mask unseen. She goes to one
  side of platform and moves her hand as though putting logs on a fire
  and stirring it into a blaze. While she makes these movements the
  Musicians play, marking the movements with drum and flute perhaps.

  Having finished she stands beside the imaginary fire at a distance
  from Cuchulain & Eithne Inguba.)

Call on Cuchulain now.

EITHNE INGUBA

  Can you not hear my voice.

EMER

                               Bend over him.
  Call out dear secrets till you have touched his heart
  If he lies there; and if he is not there
  Till you have made him jealous.

EITHNE INGUBA

                           Cuchulain, listen.

EMER

  You speak too timidly; to be afraid
  Because his wife is but three paces off
  When there is so great a need were but to prove
  The man that chose you made but a poor choice.
  We're but two women struggling with the sea.

EITHNE INGUBA

  O my beloved pardon me, that I
  Have been ashamed and you in so great need.
  I have never sent a message or called out,
  Scarce had a longing for your company
  But you have known and come; and if indeed
  You are lying there stretch out your arms and speak;
  Open your mouth and speak for to this hour
  My company has made you talkative.
  Why do you mope, and what has closed your ears.
  Our passion had not chilled when we were parted
  On the pale shore under the breaking dawn.
  He will not hear me: or his ears are closed
  And no sound reaches him.

EMER

                         Then kiss that image
  The pressure of your mouth upon his mouth
  May reach him where he is.

EITHNE INGUBA

                (starting back) It is no man.
  I felt some evil thing that dried my heart
  When my lips touched it.

EMER

                          No, his body stirs;
  The pressure of your mouth has called him home;
  He has thrown the changeling out.

EITHNE INGUBA

         (going further off) Look at that arm
  That arm is withered to the very socket.

EMER

                        (going up to the bed)
  What do you come for and from where?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                                  I have come
  From Mananan's court upon a bridleless horse.

EMER

  What one among the Sidhe has dared to lie
  Upon Cuchulain's bed and take his image?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  I am named Bricriu--not the man--that Bricriu,
  Maker of discord among gods and men,
  Called Bricriu of the Sidhe.

EMER

                       Come for what purpose?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  (sitting up and showing its distorted face. Eithne Inguba goes out)

  I show my face and everything he loves
  Must fly away.

EMER

                       You people of the wind
  Are full of lying speech and mockery.
  I have not fled your face.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                           You are not loved.

EMER

  And therefore have no dread to meet your eyes
  And to demand him of you.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                        For that I have come.
  You have but to pay the price and he is free.

EMER

  Do the Sidhe bargain?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                 When they set free a captive
  They take in ransom a less valued thing.
  The fisher when some knowledgeable man
  Restores to him his wife, or son, or daughter,
  Knows he must lose a boat or net, or it may be
  The cow that gives his children milk; and some
  Have offered their own lives. I do not ask
  Your life, or any valuable thing;
  You spoke but now of the mere chance that some day
  You'd sit together by the hearth again;
  Renounce that chance, that miserable hour,
  And he shall live again.

EMER

                            I do not question
  But you have brought ill luck on all he loves
  And now, because I am thrown beyond your power
  Unless your words are lies, you come to bargain.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  You loved your power when but newly married
  And I love mine although I am old and withered;
  You have but to put yourself into that power
  And he shall live again.

EMER

                            No, never, never.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  You dare not be accursed yet he has dared.

EMER

  I have but two joyous thoughts, two things I prize,
  A hope, a memory, and now you claim that hope.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  He'll never sit beside you at the hearth
  Or make old bones, but die of wounds and toil
  On some far shore or mountain, a strange woman
  Beside his mattress.

EMER

                      You ask for my one hope
  That you may bring your curse on all about him.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  You've watched his loves and you have not been jealous
  Knowing that he would tire, but do those tire
  That love the Sidhe?

EMER

                     What dancer of the Sidhe
  What creature of the reeling moon has pursued him?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  I have but to touch your eyes and give them sight;
  But stand at my left side.

  (He touches her eyes with his left hand, the right being withered)

EMER

                            My husband there.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  But out of reach--I have dissolved the dark
  That hid him from your eyes but not that other
  That's hidden you from his.

EMER

                            Husband, husband!

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  Be silent, he is but a phantom now
  And he can neither touch, nor hear, nor see;
  The longing and the cries have drawn him hither.
  He heard no sound, heard no articulate sound;
  They could but banish rest, and make him dream,
  And in that dream, as do all dreaming shades
  Before they are accustomed to their freedom,
  He has taken his familiar form, and yet
  He crouches there not knowing where he is
  Or at whose side he is crouched.

  (a Woman of the Sidhe has entered and stands a little inside the door)

EMER

                           Who is this woman?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  She has hurried from the Country-Under-Wave
  And dreamed herself into that shape that he
  May glitter in her basket; for the Sidhe
  Are fishers also and they fish for men
  With dreams upon the hook.

EMER

                            And so that woman
  Has hid herself in this disguise and made
  Herself into a lie.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                             A dream is body;
  The dead move ever towards a dreamless youth
  And when they dream no more return no more;
  And those more holy shades that never lived
  But visit you in dreams.

EMER

                             I know her sort.
  They find our men asleep, weary with war,
  Or weary with the chase and kiss their lips
  And drop their hair upon them, from that hour
  Our men, who yet knew nothing of it all,
  Are lonely, and when at fall of night we press
  Their hearts upon our hearts their hearts are cold.

  (She draws a knife from her girdle)

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  And so you think to wound her with a knife.
  She has an airy body. Look and listen;
  I have not given you eyes and ears for nothing.

  (The Woman of the Sidhe moves round the crouching Ghost of Cuchulain
  at front of stage in a dance that grows gradually quicker, as he
  slowly awakes. At moments she may drop her hair upon his head but
  she does not kiss him. She is accompanied by string and flute and
  drum. Her mask and clothes must suggest gold or bronze or brass or
  silver so that she seems more an idol than a human being. This
  suggestion may be repeated in her movements. Her hair too, must keep
  the metallic suggestion.)

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  Who is it stands before me there
  Shedding such light from limb and hair
  As when the moon complete at last
  With every labouring crescent past,
  And lonely with extreme delight,
  Flings out upon the fifteenth night?

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Because I long I am not complete.
  What pulled your hands about your feet
  And your head down upon your knees,
  And hid your face?

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

                                Old memories:
  A dying boy, with handsome face
  Upturned upon a beaten place;
  A sacred yew-tree on a strand;
  A woman that held in steady hand
  In all the happiness of her youth
  Before her man had broken troth,
  A burning wisp to light the door;
  And many a round or crescent more;
  Dead men and women. Memories
  Have pulled my head upon my knees.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Could you that have loved many a woman
  That did not reach beyond the human,
  Lacking a day to be complete,
  Love one that though her heart can beat,
  Lacks it but by an hour or so.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  I know you now for long ago
  I met you on the mountain side,
  Beside a well that seemed long dry,
  Beside old thorns where the hawk flew.
  I held out arms and hands but you,
  That now seem friendly, fled away
  Half woman and half bird of prey.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Hold out your arms and hands again
  You were not so dumbfounded when
  I was that bird of prey and yet
  I am all woman now.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

                                     I am not
  The young and passionate man I was
  And though that brilliant light surpass
  All crescent forms, my memories
  Weigh down my hands, abash my eyes.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Then kiss my mouth. Though memory
  Be beauty's bitterest enemy
  I have no dread for at my kiss
  Memory on the moment vanishes:
  Nothing but beauty can remain.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  And shall I never know again
  Intricacies of blind remorse?

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Time shall seem to stay his course,
  For when your mouth and my mouth meet
  All my round shall be complete
  Imagining all its circles run;
  And there shall be oblivion
  Even to quench Cuchulain's drouth,
  Even to still that heart.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

                                  Your mouth.

  (They are about to kiss, he turns away)

  O Emer, Emer.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

                            So then it is she
  Made you impure with memory.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  Still in that dream I see you stand,
  A burning wisp in your right hand,
  To wait my coming to the house,
  As when our parents married us.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Being among the dead you love her
  That valued every slut above her
  While you still lived.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

                              O my lost Emer.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  And there is not a loose-tongued schemer
  But could draw you if not dead,
  From her table and her bed.
  How could you be fit to wive
  With flesh and blood, being born to live
  Where no one speaks of broken troth
  For all have washed out of their eyes
  Wind blown dirt of their memories
  To improve their sight?

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

                      Your mouth, your mouth.

  (Their lips approach but Cuchulain turns away as Emer speaks.)

EMER

  If he may live I am content,
  Content that he shall turn on me,
  If but the dead will set him free
  That I may speak with him at whiles,
  Eyes that the cold moon or the harsh sea
  Or what I know not's made indifferent.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  What a wise silence has fallen in this dark!
  I know you now in all your ignorance
  Of all whereby a lover's quiet is rent.
  What dread so great as that he should forget
  The least chance sight or sound, or scratch or mark
  On an old door, or frail bird heard and seen
  In the incredible clear light love cast
  All round about her some forlorn lost day?
  That face, though fine enough, is a fool's face
  And there's a folly in the deathless Sidhe
  Beyond man's reach.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

                         I told you to forget
  After my fashion; you would have none of it;
  So now you may forget in a man's fashion.
  There's an unbridled horse at the sea's edge.
  Mount; it will carry you in an eye's wink
  To where the King of Country-Under-Wave,
  Old Mananan, nods above the board and moves
  His chessmen in a dream. Demand your life
  And come again on the unbridled horse.

GHOST of CUCHULAIN

  Forgive me those rough words. How could you know
  That man is held to those whom he has loved
  By pain they gave, or pain that he has given,
  Intricacies of pain.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

                                 I am ashamed
  That being of the deathless shades I chose
  A man so knotted to impurity.

  (The Ghost of Cuchulain goes out)

WOMAN of the SIDHE (to Figure of Cuchulain)

  To you that have no living light, but dropped
  From a last leprous crescent of the moon,
  I owe it all.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                      Because you have failed
  I must forego your thanks, I that took pity
  Upon your love and carried out your plan
  To tangle all his life and make it nothing
  That he might turn to you.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

                             Was it from pity
  You taught the woman to prevail against me?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

  You know my nature--by what name I am called.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  Was it from pity that you hid the truth
  That men are bound to women by the wrongs
  They do or suffer?

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                    You know what being I am.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  I have been mocked and disobeyed--your power
  Was more to you than my good-will, and now
  I'll have you learn what my ill-will can do;
  I lay you under bonds upon the instant
  To stand before our King and face the charge
  And take the punishment.

FIGURE of CUCHULAIN

                      I'll stand there first.
  And tell my story first, and Mananan
  Knows that his own harsh sea made my heart cold.

WOMAN of the SIDHE

  My horse is there and shall outrun your horse.

  (The Figure of Cuchulain falls back, the Woman of the Sidhe goes out.
  Drum taps, music resembling horse hoofs.)

EITHNE INGUBA (entering quickly)

  I heard the beat of hoofs, but saw no horse,
  And then came other hoofs and after that
  I heard low angry cries and thereupon
  I ceased to be afraid.

EMER

                             Cuchulain wakes.

  (The figure turns round. It once more wears the heroic mask.)

CUCHULAIN

  Eithne Inguba take me in your arms,
  I have been in some strange place and am afraid.

  (The First Musician comes to the front of stage, the others from each
  side and unfold the cloth singing)

THE MUSICIANS

  What makes her heart beat thus,
  Plain to be understood
  I have met in a man's house
  A statue of solitude,
  Moving there and walking;
  Its strange heart beating fast
  For all our talking.
  O still that heart at last.

  O bitter reward!
  Of many a tragic tomb!
  And we though astonished are dumb
  And give but a sigh and a word
  A passing word.

  Although the door be shut
  And all seem well enough,
  Although wide world hold not
  A man but will give you his love.
  The moment he has looked at you,
  He that has loved the best
  May turn from a statue
  His too human breast.

  O bitter reward!
  Of many a tragic tomb!
  And we though astonished are dumb
  Or give but a sigh and a word
  A passing word.

  What makes your heart so beat?
  Some one should stay at her side.
  When beauty is complete
  Her own thought will have died
  And danger not be diminished;
  Dimmed at three quarter light
  When moon's round is finished
  The stars are out of sight.

  O bitter reward!
  Of many a tragic tomb!
  And we though astonished are dumb
  Or give but a sigh and a word
  A passing word.

  (When the cloth is folded again the stage is bare.)
﻿
  Paul Ruttledge, a Country Gentleman.
  Thomas Ruttledge, his Brother.
  Mrs. Thomas Ruttledge.
  Mr. Dowler,          }
  Mr. Algie,           } Magistrates.
  Colonel Lawley,      }
  Mr. Joyce,           }
  Mr. Green, a Stipendiary Magistrate.
  Sabina Silver,            }
  Molly the Scold,          }
  Charlie Ward,             } Tinkers.
  Paddy Cockfight,          }
  Tommy the Song,           }
  Johneen, etc.             }
  Father Jerome,       }
  Father Aloysius,     } Friars.
  Father Colman,       }
  Father Bartley,      }
  Other Friars, and a crowd of countrymen.




WHERE THERE IS NOTHING.




ACT I.


     Scene: _A lawn with croquet hoops, garden chairs and
     tables. Door into house at left. Gate through hedge at back. The
     hedge is clipped into shapes of farmyard fowl._ PAUL RUTTLEDGE
     _is clipping at the hedge in front. A table with toys
     on it._

_Thomas Ruttledge._ [_Coming out on steps._] Paul, are you
coming in to lunch?

_Paul Ruttledge._ No; you can entertain these people very well. They
are your friends: you understand them.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ You might as well come in. You have been
clipping at that old hedge long enough.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You needn't worry about me. I should be bored if I
went in, and I don't want to be bored more than is necessary.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ What is that creature you are clipping at now? I
can't make it out.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, it is a Cochin China fowl, an image of some of
our neighbours, like the others.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ I don't see any likeness to anyone.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, yes there is, if you could see their minds
instead of their bodies. That comb now----

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ [_Coming out on steps._] Thomas, are you
coming in?

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Yes, I'm coming; but Paul won't come.

     [THOMAS RUTTLEDGE _goes out._

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Oh! this is nonsense, Paul; you must come. All
these men will think it so strange if you don't. It is nonsense to think
you will be bored. Mr. Green is talking in the most interesting way.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! I know Green's conversation very well.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ And Mr. Joyce, your old guardian. Thomas says he
was always so welcome in your father's time, he will think it so queer.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! I know all their virtues. There's Dowler, who
puts away thousands a year in Consols, and Algie, who tells everybody all
about it. Have I forgotten anybody? Oh, yes! Colonel Lawley, who used to
lift me up by the ears, when I was a child, to see Africa. No, Georgina,
I know all their virtues, but I'm not coming in.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ I can't imagine why you won't come in and be
sociable.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You see I can't. I have something to do here. I
have to finish this comb. You see it is a beautiful comb; but the wings
are very short. The poor creature can't fly.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ But can't you finish that after lunch?

_Paul Ruttledge._ No, I have sworn.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Well, I am sorry. You are always doing
uncomfortable things. I must go in to the others. I wish you would have
come. [_She goes in._

_Jerome._ [_Who has come to gate as she disappears._] Paul, you
there! that is lucky. I was just going to ask for you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Flinging clipper away, and jumping up._]
Oh, Father Jerome, I am delighted to see you. I haven't seen you for ever
so long. Come and have a talk; or will you have some lunch?

_Jerome._ No, thank you; I will stay a minute, but I won't go in.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That is just as well, for you would be bored to
death. There has been a meeting of magistrates in the village, and my
brother has brought them all in to lunch.

_Jerome._ I am collecting for the Monastery, and my donkey has gone
lame; I have had to put it up in the village. I thought you might be
able to lend me one to go on with.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Of course, I'm delighted to lend you that or
anything else. I'll go round to the yard with you and order it. But sit
down here first. What have you been doing all this time?

_Jerome._ Oh, we have been very busy. You know we are going to put
up new buildings.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Absent-mindedly._] No, I didn't know that.

_Jerome._ Yes, our school is increasing so much we are getting a
grant for technical instruction. Some of the Fathers are learning
handicrafts. Father Aloysius is going to study industries in France; but
we are all busy. We are changing with the times, we are beginning to do
useful things.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Useful things. I wonder what you have begun to
call useful things. Do you see those marks over there on the grass?

_Jerome._ What marks?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Those marks over there, those little marks of
scratching.

_Jerome._ [_Going over to the place_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _has
pointed out._] I don't see anything.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You are getting blind, Jerome. Can't you see that
the poultry have been scratching there?

_Jerome._ No, the grass is perfectly smooth.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, the marks are there, whether you see them
or not; for Mr. Green and Mr. Dowler and Mr. Algie and the rest of them
run out of their houses when nobody is looking, in their real shapes,
shapes like those on my hedge. And then they begin to scratch, they
scratch all together, they don't dig but they scratch, and all the time
their mouths keep going like that.

     [_He holds out his hand and opens and shuts his fingers like a
     bird's bill._

_Jerome._ Oh, Paul, you are making fun of me.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Of course I am only talking in parables. I think
all the people I meet are like farmyard creatures, they have forgotten
their freedom, their human bodies are a disguise, a pretence they keep
up to deceive one another.

_Jerome._ [_Sitting down._] What is wrong with you?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, nothing of course. You see how happy I am. I
have a good house and a good property, and my brother and his charming
wife have come to look after me. You see the toys of their children here
and everywhere. What should be wrong with me?

_Jerome._ I know you too well not to see that there is something
wrong with you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ There is nothing except that I have been thinking
a good deal lately.

_Jerome._ Perhaps your old dreams or visions or whatever they were
have come back. They always made you restless. You ought to see more of
your neighbours.

_Paul Ruttledge._ There's nothing interesting but human nature, and
that's in the single soul, but these neighbours of mine they think in
flocks and roosts.

_Jerome._ You are too hard on them. They are busy men, they hav'n't
much time for thought, I daresay.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That's what I complain of. When I hear these
people talking I always hear some organized or vested interest chirp or
quack, as it does in the newspapers. Algie chirps. Even you, Jerome,
though I have not found your armorial beast, are getting a little
monastic; when I have found it I will put it among the others. There is a
place for it there, but the worst of it is that it will take so long
getting nice and green.

_Jerome._ I don't know what creature you could make for me.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am not sure yet; I think it might be a pigeon,
something cooing and gentle, and always coming home to the dovecot; not
to the wild woods but to the dovecot.

_Jerome._ I wonder what creature you yourself are like.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I daresay I am like some creature or other, for
very few of us are altogether men; but if I am, I would like to be one
of the wild sort. You are right about my dreams. They have been coming
back lately. Do you remember those strange ones I had at college?

_Jerome._ Those visions of pulling something down?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, they have come back to me lately. Sometimes I
dream I am pulling down my own house, and sometimes it is the whole
world that I am pulling down. [_Standing up._] I would like to have
great iron claws, and to put them about the pillars, and to pull and
pull till everything fell into pieces.

_Jerome._ I don't see what good that would do you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, yes it would. When everything was pulled down
we would have more room to get drunk in, to drink contentedly out of the
cup of life, out of the drunken cup of life.

_Jerome._ That is a terribly wild thought. I hope you don't believe
all you say.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Perhaps not. I only know that I want to upset
everything about me. Have you not noticed that it is a complaint many of
us have in this country? and whether it comes from love or hate I don't
know, they are so mixed together here.

_Jerome._ I wish you would come and talk to our Superior. He has a
perfect gift for giving advice.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, we'll go to the yard now. [_He gets
up._

_Jerome._ I have often thought you would come to the Monastery
yourself in the end. You were so much the most pious of us all at
school. You would be happy in a Monastery. Something is always happening
there.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_As they go up the garden._] I daresay, I
daresay; but I am not even sure that I am a Christian.

_Jerome._ Well, anyway, I wish that you would come and talk to our
Superior. [_They go out._

       *       *       *       *       *

     CHARLIE WARD _and_ BOY _enter by the path beyond
     the hedge and stand at gate._

_Charlie Ward._ No use going up there, Johneen, it's too grand a
place, it's a dog they might let loose on us. But I'll tell you what,
just slip round to the back door and ask do they want any cans mended.

_Johneen._ Let you take the rabbit then we're after taking out of
the snare. I can't bring it round with me.

_Charlie Ward._ Faith, you can't. They think as bad of us taking a
rabbit that was fed and minded by God as if it was of their own rearing;
give it here to me. It's hardly it will go in my pocket, it's as big as
a hare. It's next my skin I'll have to put it, or it might be noticed on
me. [_Boy goes out._

     [CHARLIE WARD _is struggling to put rabbit inside his
     coat when_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _comes back._

_Paul Ruttledge._ Is there anything I can do for you? Do you want to
come in?

_Charlie Ward._ I'm a tinker by trade, your honour. I wonder is
there e'er a tin can the maids in the house might want mended or any
chairs to be bottomed?

_Paul Ruttledge._ A tinker; where do you live?

_Charlie Ward._ Faith, I don't stop long in any place. I go about
like the crows; picking up my way of living like themselves.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Opening gate._] Come inside here.
[CHARLIE WARD _hesitates._] Come in, you are welcome.

     [_Puts his hand on his shoulder._ CHARLIE WARD _tries to
     close his shirt over rabbit._

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah, you have a rabbit there. The keeper told me
he had come across some snares in my woods.

_Charlie Ward._ If he did, sir, it was no snare of mine he found.
This is a rabbit I bought in the town of Garreen early this morning.
Sixpence I was made give for it, and to mend a tin can along with that.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Touching rabbit._] It's warm still, however.
But the day is hot. Never mind; you are quite welcome to it. I daresay
you will have a cheery meal of it by the roadside; my dinners are often
tiresome enough. I often wish I could change--look here, will you change
clothes with me?

_Charlie Ward._ Faith, I'd swap soon enough if you weren't humbugging
me. It's I that would look well with that suit on me! The peelers would
all be touching their caps to me. You'd see them running out for me to
sign summonses for them.

_Paul Ruttledge._ But I am not humbugging. I am in earnest.

_Charlie Ward._ In earnest! Then when I go back I'll commit Paddy
Cockfight to prison for hitting me yesterday.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You don't believe me, but I will explain. I'm dead
sick of this life; I want to get away; I want to escape--as you say, to
pick up my living like the crows for a while.

_Charlie Ward._ To make your escape. Oh! that's different. [_Coming
closer._] But what is it you did? You don't look like one that would be
in trouble. But sometimes a gentleman gets a bit wild when he has a drop
taken.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, never mind. I will explain better while we are
changing. Come over here to the potting shed. Make haste, those
magistrates will be coming out.

_Charlie Ward._ The magistrates! Are they after you? Hurry on, then!
Faith, they won't know you with this coat. [_Looking at his rags._] It's a
pity I didn't put on my old one coming out this morning.

     [_They go out through the garden._ THOMAS RUTTLEDGE _comes
     down steps from house with_ COLONEL LAWLEY _and_
     MR. GREEN.

_Mr. Green._ Yes, they have made me President of the County
Horticultural Society. My speech was quite a success; it was punctuated
with applause. I said I looked upon the appointment not as a tribute to
my own merits, but to their public spirit and to the Society, which I
assured them had come to stay.

_Colonel Lawley._ What has become of Paul and Father Jerome? I thought
I heard their voices out here, and now they are conspicuous by their
absence.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ He seems to have no friend he cares for but that
Father Jerome.

_Mr. Green._ I wish he would come more into touch with his fellows.

_Colonel Lawley._ What a pity he didn't go into the army. I wish he
would join the militia. Every man should try to find some useful sphere
of employment.

_Mr. Green._ Thomas, your brother will never come to see me, though
I often ask him. He would find the best people--people worth meeting--at
my house. I wonder if he would join the Horticultural Society? I know I
voice the sentiments of all the members in saying this. I spoke to a
number of them at the function the other day.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ I wish he would join something. Joyce wants him
to join the Masonic Lodge. It is not a right life for him to keep hanging
about the place and doing nothing.

_Mr. Green._ He won't even come and sit on the Bench. It's not fair
to leave so much of the work to me. I ought to get all the support
possible from local men.

     [MRS. RUTTLEDGE _comes down steps with_ MR. DOWLER,
     MR. ALGIE, _and_ MR. JOYCE. _She is walking in front._

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ [_To_ THOMAS RUTTLEDGE.] Oh! Thomas, isn't it
too bad, Paul has lent the donkey to that friar. I wanted Mr. Joyce to
see the children in their panniers. Do speak to him about it.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Well, the donkey belongs to him, and for the
matter of that so does the house and the place. It would be rather hard
on him not to be able to use things as he likes.

_Mr. Algie._ What a pleasure it must be to Paul to have you and the
little ones living here. He certainly owes you a debt of gratitude. Man
was not born to live alone.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Well, I think we have done him good. He hasn't done
anything for years, except mope about the house and cut the bushes into
those absurd shapes, and now we are trying to make him live more like
other people.

_Colonel Lawley._ He was always inclined to be a bit of a faddist.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ [_To_ MR. ALGIE.] Do let me give you a lesson in
croquet. I have learned all the new rules. [_To_ MR. JOYCE.] Please
bring me that basket of balls. [_To COLONEL LAWLEY._] Will you
bring me the mallets? Yes, I am afraid he is a faddist. We have done our
best for him, but he ought to be more with men.

_Mr. Algie._ Yes, Mr. Dowler was just saying he ought to try and be
made a director of the new railway.

_Colonel Lawley._ The militia--the militia.

_Mr. Joyce._ It's a great help to a man to belong to a Masonic Lodge.

_Mr. Green._ The Horticultural Society is in want of new members.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Well, I wish he would join something.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Enter_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _in tinker's clothes, carrying a rabbit in
     his hand._ CHARLIE WARD _follows in_ PAUL'S _clothes. All stand
     aghast._

_Mr. Joyce._ Good God!

     [_Drops basket._ COLONEL LAWLEY, _who has mallets in his hand, at
     sight of_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _drops them, and stands still._

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Paul! are you out of your mind?

_Thomas Ruttledge._ For goodness' sake, Paul, don't make such a fool of
yourself.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ What on earth has happened, and who on earth is that
man?

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Opens gate for tinker. To_ CHARLIE WARD.] Wait for
me, my friend, down there by the cross-road. [CHARLIE WARD _goes out._

_Mr. Green._ Has he stolen your clothes?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! it's all right; I have changed clothes with him. I
am going to join the tinkers.

_All._ To join the tinkers!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Life is getting too monotonous; I would give it a
little variety. [_To_ MR. GREEN.] As you would say, it has been running
in grooves.

_Mr. Joyce._ [_To_ MRS. RUTTLEDGE.] This is only his humbugging
talk; he never believes what he says.

     [PAUL RUTTLEDGE _goes towards the steps._

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ Surely you are not going into the house with those
clothes?

_Paul Ruttledge._ You are quite right. Thomas will go in for me. [_To_
THOMAS RUTTLEDGE.] Just go to my study, will you, and bring me my
despatch-box; I want something from it before I go.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Where are you going to? I wish you would tell me
what you are at.

_Paul Ruttledge._ The despatch-box is on the top of the bureau.

     [_THOMAS RUTTLEDGE goes out._

_Mr. Joyce._ What does all this mean?

_Paul Ruttledge._ I will explain. [_Sits down on the edge of iron
table._] Did you never wish to be a witch, and to ride through the air
on a white horse?

_Mr. Joyce._ I can't say I ever did.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Never? Only think of it--to ride in the darkness under
the stars, to make one's horse leap from cloud to cloud, to watch the
sea glittering under one's feet and the mountain tops going by.

_Colonel Lawley._ But what has this to do with the tinkers?

_Paul Ruttledge._ As I cannot find a broomstick that will turn itself
into a white horse, I am going to turn tinker.

_Mr. Dowler._ I suppose you have some picturesque idea about these
people, but I assure you, you are quite wrong. They are nothing but
poachers.

_Mr. Algie._ They are nothing but thieves.

_Mr. Joyce._ They are the worst class in the country.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, I know that; they are quite lawless. That is what
attracts me to them. I am going to be irresponsible.

_Mr. Green._ One cannot escape from responsibility by joining a set of
vagabonds.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Vagabonds--that is it. I want to be a vagabond, a
wanderer. As I can't leap from cloud to cloud I want to wander from road
to road. That little path there by the clipped edge goes up to the
highroad. I want to go up that path and to walk along the highroad, and
so on and on and on, and to know all kinds of people. Did you ever think
that the roads are the only things that are endless; that one can walk
on and on and on, and never be stopped by a gate or a wall? They are
the serpent of eternity. I wonder they have never been worshipped. What
are the stars beside them? They never meet one another. The roads are
the only things that are infinite. They are all endless.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ But they must stop when they come to the sea?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! you are always so wise.

_Mr. Joyce._ Stop talking nonsense, Paul, and throw away those filthy
things.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That would be setting cleanliness before godliness. I
have begun the regeneration of my soul.

_Mr. Dowler._ I don't see what godliness has got to do with it.

_Mr. Algie._ Nor I either.

_Paul Ruttledge._ There was a saint who said, "I must rejoice without
ceasing, although the world shudder at my joy." He did not think he
could save his soul without it. I agree with him, and as I was
discontented here, I thought it time to make a change. Like that worthy
man, I must be content to shock my friends.

_Mr. Dowler._ But you had everything here you could want.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That's just it. You who are so wealthy, you of all
people should understand that I want to get rid of all that
responsibility, answering letters and so on. It is not worth the trouble
of being rich if one has to answer letters. Could you ever understand,
Georgina, that one gets tired of many charming things? There are family
responsibilities [_to_ MR. JOYCE], but I can see that you, who were my
guardian, sympathize with me in that.

_Mr. Joyce._ Indeed I do not.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ I should think you could be cheerful without ceasing
to be a gentleman.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You are thinking of my clothes. We must feel at ease
with the people we live amongst. I shall feel at ease with the great
multitude in these clothes. I am beginning to be a man of the world. I
am the beggarman of all the ages--I have a notion Homer wrote something
about me.

_Mr. Dowler._ He is either making fun of us or talking great rot. I
can't listen to any more of this nonsense. I can't see why a man with
property can't let well alone. Algie are you coming my way?

     [_They both go into the house, and come out presently with umbrella
     and coat._

_Mr. Green._ Depend upon it, he's going to write a book. There was a man
who made quite a name for himself by sleeping in a casual ward.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! no, I'm not going to write about it; if one writes
one can do nothing else. I am going to express myself in life. [_To_
THOMAS RUTTLEDGE _who has returned with box._] I hope soon to live by the
work of my hands, but every trade has to be learned, and I must take
something to start with. [_To_ MRS. RUTTLEDGE.] Do you think you will
have any kettles to mend when I come this way again?

     [_He has taken box from_ THOMAS RUTTLEDGE _and unlocked it._

_Thomas Ruttledge._ I can't make head or tail of what you are at.

_Colonel Lawley._ What he is at is fads.

_Mr. Green._ I don't think his motive is far to seek. He has some idea
of going back to the dark ages. Rousseau had some idea of the same kind,
but it didn't work.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes; I want to go back to the dark ages.

_Mr. Green._ Do you want to lose all the world has gained since then?

_Paul Ruttledge._ What has it gained? I am among those who think that
sin and death came into the world the day Newton eat the apple. [_To_
MRS. RUTTLEDGE, _who is going to speak._] I know you are going to tell me
he only saw it fall. Never mind, it is all the same thing.

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ [_Beginning to cry._] Oh! he is going mad!

_Mr. Joyce._ I'm afraid he is really leaving us.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Who has been looking at papers, tearing one or two,
etc., takes out a packet of notes, which he puts in his breast._] I
daresay this will last me long enough, Thomas. I am not robbing you of
very much. Well, good-bye. [_Pats him gently on the shoulder._] I
mustn't forget the rabbit, it may be my dinner to-night; I wonder who
will skin it. Good-bye, Colonel, I think I've astonished you to-day.
[_Slaps his shoulder._] That was too hard, was it? Forgive it, you know
I'm a common man now. [_Lifts his hat and goes out of gate. Closes it
after him and stands with his hands on it, and speaks with the voice of
a common man._] Go on, live in your poultry-yard. Scratch straw and
cluck and cackle at everything that you take for a fox. [_Exit._

_Mr. Joyce._ [_Goes to_ MRS. RUTTLEDGE, _who has sat down and is wiping
her eyes._] I am very sorry for this, for his father's sake, but it may
be as well in the end. If it comes to the worst, you and Thomas will
keep up the family name better than he would have done.

_Mr. Dowler._ He'll find the poor very different from what he thinks
when they pick his pocket.

_Colonel Lawley._ To think that a magistrate should have such fads!

_Mr. Green._ I venture to say you will see him here in a very different
state of mind in a week.

_Mr. Algie._ [_Who has been in a brown study._] He has done for himself
in this world and the next. Why, he won't be asked to a single shoot if
this is heard of.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ [_Turning from the gate._] Here are the children,
Georgina. Don't say anything before the nurse.

_Mr. Green._ Well, I must be off. [_Goes in for stick._

_Mr. Joyce._ Just bring me out my coat, Green.

     [_They all prepare to go._ MRS. RUTTLEDGE _has gone to open gate and
     children come in, one in a perambulator. All gather round them
     admiringly._

_Mr. Joyce._ Have you a kiss for godfather to-day?

_Mrs. Ruttledge._ The poor darlings! I hope they will never know what
has happened.

_Colonel Lawley._ Thank goodness, they have no nonsense in their heads.
We know where we are with them.


CURTAIN.




ACT II.


     Scene: _By the roadside. A wall of unmortared stone in the
     background. Tinkers' encampment. Men, women, and children standing
     round._ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _standing by a fire._

_Paul Ruttledge._ What do you mean by "tinning" the soldering iron?

_Charlie Ward._ If the face of it is not well tinned it won't lift the
solder. Show me here.

     [_Takes soldering iron from_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE'S _hand._

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Sitting down and drawing a tin can to him._] Now,
let me see how you mend this hole. It seems easy. I'm sure I will be
able to learn it as well as any of you.

     [_Two tinkers come and stand over him._

_Charlie Ward._ [_Pointing to one of them._] This, sir, is Tommy the
Song. He's the best singer we have, but the divil a much good he is only
that. He's a great warrant to snare hares.

_Tommy the Song._ Is the gentleman going to join us?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Indeed I am, if you'll let me. There's nothing I'd
like better.

_Tommy the Song._ But are you going to learn the trade?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, if you'll teach me. I'm sure I'll make a good
tinker. Look at that now, see how I've stopped that hole already.

_Charlie Ward._ [_Taking the can from him and looking at it._] If every
can had a little hole in the middle like that, I think you _would_ be
able to mend them; but there's the straight hole, and the crooked hole,
the round hole, the square hole, the angle hole, the bottom hole, the
top hole, the side leak, the open leak, the leak-all-round, but I won't
frighten you with the names of them all, only this I will say, that,
when you've learned to mend all the leakages in a can--and that should
take you a year--you're only in the first day of the tinker's week.

_Tommy the Song._ Don't believe him. He's only humbugging you. It's not
the hardness of the work will daunt you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Thank you. I was not believing him at all. I'm quite
sure I'll be able to mend any can at the end of a week, but the
bottoming of them will take longer. I can see that's not so easy. When
will you start to teach me that, Charlie?

_Charlie Ward._ [_As another tinker comes up._] Paddy, here's the
gentleman I was telling you about. He's going to join us for good and
all. [_To_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE.] Wait till we have time and some quiet place,
and he'll show you as good a cockfight as ever you saw. [_A woman comes
up._] This is his wife; Molly the Scold we call her; faith, she is a
better fighter than any cock he ever had in a basket; he'd find it hard
to shut the lid on her.

_Molly the Scold._ The gentleman seems foolish. Is he all there?

_Paddy Cockfight._ Stop your chat, Molly, or I'll hit you a welt.

_Charlie Ward._ Keep your tongue quiet, Molly. If the gentleman has
reasons for keeping out of the way it isn't for us to be questioning
him. [_To_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE.] Don't mind her, she's cross enough, but
maybe your own ladies would be cross as well if they saw their young
sons dying by the roadside in a little kennel of straw under the
ass-cart the way she did; from first to last.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I suppose you have your troubles like others. But you
seem cheerful enough.

_Charlie Ward._ It isn't anything to fret about. Some of us go soon, and
some travel the roads for their lifetime. What does it matter when we
are under the nettles if it was with a short rope or a long one we were
hanged?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, that is the way to take life. What does the
length of our rope matter?

_Charlie Ward._ We haven't time to be thinking of troubles like people
that would be shut up in a house. We have the wide world before us to
make our living out of. The people of the whole world are begrudging us
our living, and we make it out of them for all that. When they will
spread currant cakes and feather beds before us, it will be time for us
to sit down and fret.

_Tommy the Song._ It's likely you'll think the life too hard. Would you
like to be passing by houses in the night-time, and the fire shining out
of them, and you hardly given the loan of a sod to light your pipe, and
the rain falling on you?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Why are the people so much against you?

_Tommy the Song._ We are not like themselves. It's little we care about
them or they about us. If their saint did curse us itself----

_Charlie Ward._ Stop. I won't have you talking about that story here.
Why would they think so much of the curse of one saint, and saints so
plenty?

_Paddy Cockfight._ Where's the good of a gentleman being here? He'll be
breaking down on the road. It's on the ass-cart he'll be wanting to sit.

_Tommy the Song._ Indeed, I don't think he'll stand the hardship.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, I'll stand it well enough.

_Tommy the Song._ You're not like us that were reared to it. You were
not born like us with wandering in the heart.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh yes, I have wandering in the heart. I got sick of
these lighted rooms you were talking of just now.

_Charlie Ward._ That might be so. It's the dark is welcome to a man
sometimes.

_Paul Ruttledge._ The dark. Yes, I think that is what I want. [_Stands
up._] The dark, where there is nothing that is anything, and nobody that
is anybody; one can be free there, where there is nothing. Well, if you
let me stay with you, I don't think you will hear any complaints from
me. Charlie Ward, Paddy, and the rest of you, I want you to understand
that from this out I am one of yourselves. I'll live as you live and do
as you do.

     [JOHNEEN _and other children come running in._

_Johneen._ I was on the top of the bank and I seen a priest coming down
the cross-road with his ass. It's collecting he is. We're going to set
ourselves here to beg something from him.

_Another Child._ [_Breathlessly._] And he has a whole lot of things on
the ass. A whole lot of things up behind him.

_Another Child._ O boys, O boys, we'll have our dealing trick out of
them yet. The best way'll be---- [_He suddenly catches sight of_ PAUL
RUTTLEDGE.] Whist, ye divils ye, don't you see the new gentleman?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Speak out, boys; don't be afraid of me; I'm one of
yourselves now.

_Child._ Oh! but we were going to---- But I won't tell you. [_To the
other_ children.] Come away here, and we'll not tell him what we'll do.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_To_ CHARLIE WARD.] What are they going to do?
They're putting their heads together.

_Charlie Ward._ They're going to put a bush across the road, and when
the friar gets down to pull it out of the way they'll snap what they can
off the ass, and away with them.

_Paul Ruttledge._ And why wouldn't they tell me that? Am I not one of
yourselves?

_Charlie Ward._ Ah! It's likely they'll never trust you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ But they will soon see that I am one of themselves.

_Charlie Ward._ No; but that's the very thing, you're not one of
ourselves. You were not born on the road, reared on the road, married on
the road like us.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, it's too late for me to be reared on the road,
but I don't see why I shouldn't marry on the road like you. I certainly
would do it if it would make me one of you.

_Charlie Ward._ It might make you one of us, there's no doubt about
that. It's the only thing that would do it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, find a wife for me.

_Charlie Ward._ Faith, you haven't far to go to find one. Paddy there
will give you over his wife quick enough; he won't make a hard bargain
over her.

_Paul Ruttledge._ But I am in earnest. I want to cut myself off from my
old life.

_Charlie Ward._ Oh! I was forgetting that.

_Sabina Silver._ [_To_ MOLLY.] I wonder what was it he did? I wonder had
he the misfortune to kill anybody?

_Charlie Ward._ [_Calling_ SABINA _over._] Here's a girl should make a
good wife, Sabina Silver her name is. Her father is just dead; he didn't
treat her over well.

_Sabina Silver._ [_Coming over._] What is it?

_Charlie Ward._ This gentleman wants to speak to you. I think he's
looking out for a wife.

_Sabina Silver._ [_Hanging her head._] Don't be humbugging me.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Indeed he's not, Sabina.

_Sabina Silver._ You're only joking a poor girl. Sure, what would make
you think of me at all?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Sabina, have you been always on the road with Charlie
Ward and the others?

_Sabina Silver._ I have, indeed.

_Paul Ruttledge._ And you'd make a good tinker's wife?

_Sabina Silver._ You're joking me, but I would be a better wife for a
tinker than for anyone else.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Sabina, will you marry me?

_Sabina Silver._ Oh! but I'd be afraid.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Why, Sabina?

_Sabina Silver._ I'd be afraid you'd beat me.

_Charlie Ward._ You see her father used to beat her. She's afraid of the
look of a man now.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I would not beat you, Sabina. How can you have got
such an idea?

_Sabina Silver._ Will you promise me that you won't beat me? Will you
swear it to me?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Of course I will.

_Sabina Silver._ [_To_ CHARLIE WARD.] Will you make him swear it?
Haven't you a little book in your pack? Bring it out and make him swear
to me on it, and you'll be my witness.

_Charlie Ward._ I think, Sibby, you need not be afraid.

_Sabina Silver._ What's your name, gentleman?

_Paul Ruttledge._ My name is Paul. Do you like it?

_Sabina Silver._ Then I won't marry you, Mr. Paul, till you swear to me
upon the book that you will never beat me with any stick that you could
call a stick, and that you will never strike a kick on me from behind.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Charlie, go and bring out that book to satisfy her. Of
course I swear that; it is absurd.

     [CHARLIE WARD _brings the book out of his pack._

_Paul Ruttledge._ I swear, Sabina, that I will never strike you with any
stick of any kind, and that I will never kick you. There, will that do?
[_He takes book and kisses it._

_Sabina Silver._ I misdoubt you. Kiss the book again. [PAUL RUTTLEDGE
_kisses it._

_Charlie Ward._ That's all right.

_A Child._ [_Crying from a distance._] He's coming now, the priest's
coming!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Then the priest will marry us. That comes in very
handy.

_Charlie Ward._ [_Scornfully._] A priest marry you, indeed he'll do
nothing of the kind. I hate priests and friars. It's unlucky to get
talking to them at all. You never know what trouble you're in for.

_A Child._ [_Coming up._] That's true, indeed. The last time I spoke to
a priest it's what he leathered me with a stick; may the divil fly away
with him.

_Paul Ruttledge._ But somebody must marry us.

_Charlie Ward._ Of course. You'll lep over the tinker's budget the usual
way. You'll just marry her by lepping over the budget the same as the
rest of us marry.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That's all I want to know. Please marry me in whatever
is your usual way.

       *       *       *       *       *

     JEROME _enters, leading the ass. He carries a pig's cheek, some
     groceries, a string of onions, etc., on the ass, which still has
     its nursery trappings. He goes up to_ CHARLIE WARD _thinking he is_
     PAUL RUTTLEDGE.

_Jerome._ Paul, what are you doing here?

_Charlie Ward._ [_Turning._] What do you want?

_Jerome._ Oh! I'm mistaken. I thought----

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am here, Father Jerome, but you're talking to the
wrong man.

_Jerome._ Good God, Paul, what has happened?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Nothing has happened that need surprise you. Don't you
remember what we talked of to-day? You told me I was too much by myself.
After you went away I thought I would make a change.

_Jerome._ But a change like this!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Why should you find fault with it? I am richer now
than I was then. I only lent you that donkey then, now I give him to
you.

_Jerome._ What has brought you among such people as these?

_Paul Ruttledge._ I find them on the whole better company than the
people I left a little while ago. Let me introduce you to----

_Jerome._ What can you possibly gain by coming here? Are you going to
try and teach them?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! no, I am going to learn from them.

_Jerome._ What can you learn from them?

_Paul Ruttledge._ To pick up my living like the crows, and to solder tin
cans. Just give me that one I mended a while ago.

     [_Holds it out to_ FATHER JEROME.

_Jerome._ That is all nonsense.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am happy. Do not your saints put all opponents to
the rout by saying they alone of all mankind are happy?

_Jerome._ I suppose you will not compare the happiness of these people
with the happiness of saints?

_Paul Ruttledge._ There are all sorts of happiness. Some find their
happiness like Thomas à Kempis, with a little book and a little cell.

_Paddy Cockfight._ I would wonder at anybody that could be happy in a
cell.

_Paul Ruttledge._ These men fight in their way as your saints fought,
for their hand is against the world. I want the happiness of men who
fight, who are hit and hit back, not the fighting of men in red coats,
that formal, soon-finished fighting, but the endless battle, the endless
battle. Tell me, Father Jerome, did you ever listen in the middle of the
night?

_Jerome._ Listen for what?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Did you ever, when the monastery was silent, and the
dogs had stopped barking, listen till you heard music?

_Jerome._ What sort of music do you mean?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Not the music we hear with these ears [_touching his
ears_], but the music of Paradise.

_Jerome._ Brother Colman once said he heard harps in the night.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Harps! It was because he was shut in a cell he heard
harps, maybe it sounds like harps in a cell. But the music I have heard
sometimes is made of the continual clashing of swords. It comes
rejoicing from Paradise.

_Jerome._ These are very wild thoughts.

_Tommy the Song._ I often heard music in the forths. There is many of us
hear it when we lie with our heads on the ground at night.

_Jerome._ That was not the music of Paradise.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Why should they not hear that music, although it may
not set them praying, but dancing.

_Jerome._ How can you think you will ever find happiness amongst their
devils' mirth?

_Paul Ruttledge._ I have taken to the roads because there is a wild
beast I would overtake, and these people are good snarers of beasts.
They can help me.

_Charlie Ward._ What kind of a wild beast is it you want?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! it's a very terrible wild beast, with iron teeth
and brazen claws that can root up spires and towers.

_Charlie Ward._ It's best not to try and overtake a beast like that, but
to cross running water and leave it after you.

_Tommy the Song._ I heard one coming after me one night; very big and
shadowy it was, and I could hear it breathing. But when it came up with
me I lifted a hazel rod was in my hand, and it was gone on the moment.

_Paul Ruttledge._ My wild beast is Laughter, the mightiest of the
enemies of God. I will outrun it and make it friendly.

_Jerome._ That is your old wild talk. Do have some sense and go back to
your family.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am never going back to them. I am going to live
among these people. I will marry among them.

_Jerome._ That is nonsense; you will soon change your mind.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! no, I won't; I am taking my vows as you made yours
when you entered religion. I have chosen my wife; I am going to marry
before evening.

_Jerome._ Thank God, you will have to stop short of that, the Church
will never marry you.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! I am not going to ask the help of the Church. But
I am to be married by what may be as old a ceremony as yours. What is
it I am to do, Charlie?

_Charlie Ward._ To lep a budget, sir.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, that is it, the budget is there by the wall.

_Jerome._ I command you, in the name of the Holy Church and of the
teaching you have received from the Church, to leave this folly, this
degradation, this sin!

_Paul Ruttledge._ You forget, Jerome, that I am on the track of the wild
beast, and hunters in all ages have been a bad people to preach to. When
I have tamed the beast, perhaps I will bring him to your religious house
to be baptized.

_Jerome._ I will not listen to this profanity. [_To_ CHARLIE WARD.] It
is you who have put this madness on him as you have stolen his clothes!

_Charlie Ward._ Stop your chat, ye petticoated preacher.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I think, Father Jerome, you had better be getting
home. This people never gave in to the preaching of S. Patrick.

_Paddy Cockfight._ I'll send you riding home with your face to the tail
of the ass!

_Tommy the Song._ No, stop till we show you that we can make as good
curses as yourself. That you may never be warm in winter or cold in
summer time----

_Charlie Ward._ That's the chat! Bravo! Let him have it.

_Tinkers._ Be off! be off out of this!

_Molly the Scold._ Now curse him, Tommy.

_Tommy the Song._ A wide hoarseness on you--a high hanging to you on a
windy day; that shivering fever may stretch you nine times, and that the
curses of the poor may be your best music, and you hiding behind the
door. [JEROME _goes out._

_Molly the Scold._ And you hiding behind the door, and squeezed between
the hinges and the wall.

_Other Tinkers._ Squeezed between the hinges and the wall. [_They follow_
JEROME.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Crying after them._] Don't harm that gentleman; he
is a friend of mine.

     [_He goes to the wall, and stands there silently, looking upward._

_Sabina Silver._ It was grand talk, indeed: I didn't understand a word
of it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ The crows are beginning to fly home. There is a flock
of them high up under that cloud. I wonder where their nests are.

_Charlie Ward._ A long way off, among those big trees about Tillyra
Castle.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, I remember. I have seen them coming home there on
a windy evening, tossing and whirling like the sea. They may have seen
what I am looking for, they fly so far. A sailor told me once that he
saw a crow three hundred miles from land, but maybe he was a liar.

_Charlie Ward._ Well, they fly far, anyway.

_Paul Ruttledge._ They tell one another what they have seen, too. That
is why they make so much noise. Maybe their news goes round the world.
[_He comes towards the others._] I think they have seen my wild beast,
Laughter. They could tell me if he has a face smoky from the eternal
fires, and wings of brass and claws of brass--claws of brass. [_Holds
out his hands and moves them like claws._] Sabina, would you like to see
a beast with eyes hard and cold and blue, like sapphires? Would you,
Sabina? Well, it's time now for the wedding. So what shall we get for
the wedding party? What would you like, Sabina?

_Sabina Silver._ I don't know.

_Paul Ruttledge._ What do you say, Charlie? A wedding cake and
champagne. How would you like champagne? [Tinkers _begin to return_.

_Charlie Ward._ It might be middling.

_Paul Ruttledge._ What would you say to a----

       *       *       *       *       *

     _One of the_ Boys _runs in carrying a pig's cheek. The rest of the_
     Tinkers _return with him_.

_Boy._ I knew I could do it. I told you I'd have my dealing trick out of
the priest. I took a hold of this, and Johneen made a snap at the
onions.

_Paul Ruttledge._ And he didn't catch you?

_Boy._ He'd want to be a lot smarter than he is to do that.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You are a smart lad, anyway. What do you say we should
have for our wedding party?

_Boy._ Are you rich?

_Paul Ruttledge._ More or less.

_Boy._ I seen a whole truck full of cakes and bullseyes in the village
below. Could you buy the whole of them?

_Charlie Ward._ Stop talking nonsense. What we want is porter.

_Paul Ruttledge._ All right. How many public-houses are there in the
village?

_Tommy the Song._ Twenty-four.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Is there any place we can have barrels brought to?

_Charlie Ward._ There's a shed near seems to be empty. We might go
there.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Then go and order as many barrels as we can make use
of to be brought there.

_Paddy Cockfight._ We will; and we'll stop till we've drunk them out.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Taking out money._] I have more money than will pay
for that. Sabina, we'll treat the whole neighbourhood in honour of our
wedding. I'll have all the public-houses thrown open, and free drinks
going for a week!

_Tinkers._ Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!

_Charlie Ward._ Three cheers more, boys.

_All._ Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!

_The Boys._ Now here's the budget.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Taking_ SABINA SILVER'S _hand_.] Now, Sabina, one,
two, three!


CURTAIN.




ACT III.


     Scene: _A large shed. Some sheepskins hanging up. Irons and pots
     for branding sheep, some pitchforks, etc. Tinkers playing cards,_
     PAUL RUTTLEDGE _sitting on an upturned basket_.

_Charlie Ward._ Stop that melodeon, now will ye, and we'll have a taste
of the cocks. Paul didn't see them yet what they can do. Where's Tommy?
Where in the earthly world is Tommy the Song?

_Paddy Cockfight._ He's over there in the corner.

_Charlie Ward._ What are you doing there, Tommy?

_Tommy the Song._ Taking a mouthful of prayers, I am.

_Charlie Ward._ Praying! did anyone ever hear the like of that? Pull him
out of the corner.

     [PADDY COCKFIGHT _pulls_ TOMMY THE SONG _out of the corner_.

_Charlie Ward._ What is it you were praying for, I would like to know?

_Tommy the Song._ I was praying that we might all soon die.

_Paddy Cockfight._ Die, is it?

_Charlie Ward._ Is it die and all that porter about? Well! you have done
enough praying, go over there and look for the basket. Who was it set
him praying, I wonder? I am thinking it is the first prayer he ever said
in his life.

_Sabina Silver._ It's likely it was Paul. He's after talking to him
through the length of an hour.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Maybe it was. Don't mind him. I said just now that
when we were all dead and in heaven it would be a sort of drunkenness, a
sort of ecstasy. There is a hymn about it, but it is in Latin. "Et calix
meus inebrians quam praeclarus est." How splendid is the cup of my
drunkenness!

_Charlie Ward._ Well, that is a great sort of a hymn. I never thought
there was a hymn like that, I never did.

_Paddy Cockfight._ To think, now, there is a hymn like that. I mustn't
let it slip out of my mind. How splendid is the cup of my drunkenness,
that's it.

_Charlie Ward._ Have you found that old bird of mine?

_Tommy the Song._ [_Who has been searching among the baskets._] Here he
is, in the basket and a lot of things over it.

_Charlie Ward._ Get out that new speckled bird of yours, Paddy, I've
been wanting to see how could he play for a week past.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Where do you get the cocks?

_Paddy Cockfight._ It was a man below Mullingar owned this one. The day
I first seen him I fastened my two eyes on him, he preyed on my mind,
and next night, if I didn't go back every foot of nine miles to put him
in my bag.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Do you pay much for a good fighting cock?

_Sabina Silver._ [_Laughs._] Do you pay much, Paddy?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Perhaps you don't pay anything.

_Sabina Silver._ I think Paddy gets them cheap.

_Charlie Ward._ He gets them cheaper than another man would, anyhow.

_Paddy Cockfight._ He's the best cock I ever saw before or since.
Believe me, I made no mistake when I pitched on him.

_Tommy the Song._ I don't care what you think of him. I'll back the red;
it's he has the lively eye.

_Molly the Scold._ Andy Farrell had an old cock, and it bent double like
himself, and all the feathers flittered out of it, but I hold you he'd
leather both your red and your speckled cock together. I tell ye, boys,
that was the cock!

     [_Uproarious shouts and yells heard outside._

_Charlie Ward._ Those free drinks of yours, Paul, is playing the devil
with them. Do you hear them now and every roar out of them? They're
putting the cocks astray. [_He takes out a cock._] Sure they think it's
thunder.

_Molly the Scold._ There's not a man of them outside there now but would
be ready to knock down his own brother.

_Tommy the Song._ He wouldn't know him to knock him down. They're all
blind. I never saw the like of it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You in here stood it better than that.

_Charlie Ward._ When those common men drink it's what they fall down.
They haven't the heads. They're not like us that have to keep heads and
heels on us.

_Paddy Cockfight._ It's well we kept them out of this, or they'd be
lying on the floor now, and there'd be no place for my poor bird to show
himself off. Look at him now! Isn't he the beauty! [_Takes out the
cock._

_Charlie Ward._ Now boys, settle the place, put over those barrels out
of that. [_They push barrels into a row at back._] Paul, you sit on the
bin the way you'll get a good view.

     [_A loud knock at the door. An authoritative voice outside._

_Voice._ Open this door.

_Paddy Cockfight._ That's Green, the Removable; I know his voice well!

_Charlie Ward._ Clear away, boys. Back with those cocks. There, throw
that sack over the baskets. Quick, will ye!

_Colonel Lawley._ [_Outside._] Open this door at once.

_Mr. Green._ [_Outside._] I insist on this door being opened.

_Molly the Scold._ What do they want at all? I wish we didn't come into
a place with no back door to it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ There's nothing to be afraid of. Open the door,
Charlie. [CHARLIE WARD _opens the door_.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Enter_ MR. GREEN, COLONEL LAWLEY, MR. DOWLER, MR. JOYCE, MR. ALGIE
     _and_ THOMAS RUTTLEDGE.

_Paddy Cockfight._ All J.P.'s; I have looked at every one of them from
the dock!

_Mr. Green._ Mr. Ruttledge, this is very sad.

_Mr. Joyce._ This is a disgraceful business, Paul; the whole countryside
is demoralized. There is not a man who has come to sensible years who is
not drunk.

_Mr. Dowler._ This is a flagrant violation of all propriety. Society is
shaken to its roots. My own servants have been led astray by the free
drinks that are being given in the village. My butler, who has been with
me for seven years, has not been seen for the last two days.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am sure you will echo Mr. Dowler, Algie.

_Mr. Algie._ Indeed I do. I endorse his sentiments completely. There has
not been a stroke of work done for the last week. The hay is lying in
ridges where it has been cut, there is not a man to be found to water
the cattle. It is impossible to get as much as a horse shod in the
village.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I think you have something to say, Colonel Lawley?

_Colonel Lawley._ I have undoubtedly. I want to know when law and order
are to be re-established. The police have been quite unable to cope with
the disorder. Some of them have themselves got drunk. If my advice had
been taken the military would have been called in.

_Mr. Green._ The military are not indispensable on occasions like the
present. There are plenty of police coming now. We have wired to Dublin
for them, they will be here by the four o'clock train.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Gets down from his bin._] But you have not told me
what you have come here for? Is there anything I can do for you?

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Won't you come home, Paul? The children have been
asking for you, and we don't know what to say.

_Mr. Green._ We have come to request you to go to the public-houses, to
stop the free drinks, to send the people back to their work. As for
those tinkers, the law will deal with them when the police arrive.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Oh, Paul, why have you upset the place like this?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, I wanted to give a little pleasure to my
fellow-creatures.

_Mr. Dowler._ This seems rather a low form of pleasure.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I daresay it seems to you a little violent. But the
poor have very few hours in which to enjoy themselves; they must take
their pleasure raw; they haven't the time to cook it.

_Mr. Algie._ But drunkenness!

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Putting his hand on the shoulders of two of the
magistrates._] Have we not tried sobriety? Do you like it? I found it
very dull? [_A yell from outside._] There is not one of those people
outside but thinks that he is a king, that he is riding the wind. There
is not one of them that would not hit the world a slap in the face. Some
poet has written that exuberance is beauty, and that the roadway of
excess leads to the palace of wisdom. But I forgot--you do not read the
poets.

_Mr. Dowler._ What we want to know is, are you going to send the people
back to their work?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, work is such a little thing in comparison with
experience. Think what it is to them to have their imagination like a
blazing tar-barrel for a whole week. Work could never bring them such
blessedness as that.

_Mr. Dowler._ Everyone knows there is no more valuable blessing than
work.

_Mr. Algie._ Idleness is the curse of this country.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am prejudiced, for I have always been an idler.
Doubtless, the poor must work. It was, no doubt, of them you were
speaking. Yet, doesn't the Church say, doesn't it describe heaven as a
place where saints and angels only sing and hold branches and wander
about hand in hand. That must be changed. We must teach the poor to
think work a thing fit for heaven, a blessed thing. I'll tell you what
we'll do, Dowler. Will you subscribe, and you, and you, and we'll send
lecturers about with magic lanterns showing heaven as it should be, the
saints with spades and hammers in their hands and everybody working. The
poor might learn to think more of work then. Will you join in that
scheme, Dowler?

_Mr. Dowler._ I think you'd better leave these subjects alone. It is
obvious you have cut yourself off from both religion and society.

_Mr. Green._ The world could not go on without work.

_Paul Ruttledge._ The world could not go on without work! The world
could not go on without work! I must think about it. [_Gets up on bin._]
Why should the world go on? Perhaps the Christian teacher came to bring
it to an end. Let us send messengers everywhere to tell the people to
stop working, and then the world may come to an end. He spoke of the
world, the flesh, and the devil. Perhaps it would be a good thing to end
these one by one.

_Colonel Lawley._ Come away out of this. He has gone mad.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! I thought that would scare them.

_Mr. Joyce._ I wish, Paul, you would come back and live like a
Christian.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Like a Christian?

_Mr. Joyce._ Come away, there's no use stopping here any longer.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Sternly._] Wait, I have something to say to that.
[_To_ CHARLIE WARD.] Do not let anyone leave this place.

     [Tinkers _close together at the door_.

_Mr. Green._ [_To_ Tinkers.] This is nonsense. Let me through.

     [Tinker _spreads out his arms before him_.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You have come into a different kingdom now; the old
kingdom of the people of the roads, the houseless people. We call
ourselves tinkers, and you are going to put us on our trial if you can.
You call yourselves Christians and we will put you on your trial first.
I will put the world on its trial, and myself of yesterday. [_To a_
Boy.] Run out, Johneen, keep a watch, and tell us when the train is
coming. Sabina, that rope; we will set these gentlemen on those barrels.
[Tinkers _take hold of them_.

_Colonel Lawley._ Keep your hands off me, you drunken scoundrel!

     [_Strikes at_ CHARLIE WARD, _but_ Tinkers _seize his arms behind_.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Tie all their hands behind them.

_Mr. Dowler._ We'd better give in, there's no saying how many more of
them there are.

_Mr. Algie._ I'll be quiet, the odds are too great against us.

_Mr. Green._ The police will soon be here; we may as well stay quietly.

_Paddy Cockfight._ Here, give it to me, I'll put a good twist in it.
Don't be afraid, sir, it's not about your neck I'm putting it----. There
now, sit quiet and easy, and you won't feel it at all.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Are all their hands tied? Now then, heave them up on
to the barrels.

     [_Slight scuffle, during which all are put on the barrels in a
     semicircle._

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! yes, you are on my barrels now; last time I saw
you, you were on your own dunghill. Let me see, is there anyone here who
can write?

_Charlie Ward._ Nobody.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Never mind, you can keep count on your fingers. The
rest must sit down and behave themselves as befits a court. They say
they are living like Christians. Let us see.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ Oh, Paul, don't make such a fool of yourself.

_Paul Ruttledge._ The point is not wisdom or folly, but the Christian
life.

_Mr. Dowler._ Don't answer him, Thomas. Let us preserve our dignity.

_Mr. Algie._ Yes, let us keep a dignified attitude--we won't answer
these ruffians at all.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Respect the court! [_Turns to Colonel Lawley._] You
have served your Queen and country in the field, and now you are a
colonel of militia.

_Colonel Lawley._ Well, what is there to be ashamed of in that? Answer
me that, now.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yet there is an old saying about turning the other
cheek, an old saying, a saying so impossible that the world has never
been able to get it out of its mind. You have helped to enlist men for
the army, I think? Some of them have fought in the late war, and you
have even sent some of your own militia there.

_Colonel Lawley._ If I did I'm proud of it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Did they think it was a just war?

_Colonel Lawley._ That was not their business. They had taken the
Queen's pay. They would have disgraced themselves if they had not gone.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Is it not the doctrine of your Christian Church, of
your Catholic Church, that he who fights in an unjust war, knowing it to
be unjust, loses his own soul?

_Colonel Lawley._ I should like to know what would happen to the country
if there weren't soldiers to protect it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ We are not discussing the country, we are discussing
the Christian life. Has this gentleman lived the Christian life?

_All the Tinkers._ He has not!

_Paddy Cockfight._ His sergeant tried to enlist me, giving me a
shilling, and I drunk.

_Tommy the Song._ [_Singing._]

  She bid me take love easy, as the leaves grow on the tree,
  But I, being young and foolish, with her would not agree.

_Charlie Ward._ Stop your mouth, Tommy. This is not your show. [_To_ PAUL
RUTTLEDGE.] Are you going to put a fine on the Colonel? If so I'd like
his cloak.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Now we'll try Mr. Dowler, the rich man. [_Holds up his
fingers in a ring._] Mr. Dowler, could you go through this?

_Mr. Algie._ Don't answer him, Dowler; he's going beyond all bounds.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I was a rich man and I could not, and yet I am
something smaller than a camel, and this is something larger than a
needle's eye.

_Mr. Joyce._ Don't answer this profanity.

_Charlie Ward._ But what about the cloak?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh! go and take it.

     [CHARLIE WARD _goes and takes cloak off the_ COLONEL.

_Colonel Lawley._ You drunken rascal, I'll see you in the dock for this.

_Mr. Joyce._ You're encouraging robbery now.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Remember the commandment, "Give to him that asketh
thee"; and the hard commandment goes even farther, "Him that taketh thy
cloak forbid not to take thy coat also." [_Holding out his rags._]
Have I not shown you what Mr. Green would call a shining example.
Charlie, ask them all for their coats.

_Charlie Ward._ I will, and their boots, too.

_All the Tinkers._ [_Uproariously._] Give me your coat; I'll have your
boots, etc.

_Mr. Green._ Wait till the police come. I'll turn the tables on you; you
may all expect hard labour for this.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_To the_ Tinkers.] Stand back, the trial is not over.
Mr. Green, these friends of yours have been convicted of breaking the
doctrine they boast of. They do not love their enemies; they do not give
to every man that asks of them. Some of them, Mr. Dowler, for instance,
lay up treasures upon earth; they ask their goods again of those who
have taken them away. But you, Mr. Green, are the worst of all. They
break the Law of Christ for their own pleasure, but you take pay for
breaking it. When their goods are taken away you condemn the taker; when
they are smitten on one cheek you punish the smiter. You encourage them
in their breaking of the Law of Christ.

_Tommy the Song._ He does, indeed. He gave me two months for snaring
rabbits.

_Paddy Cockfight._ He tried to put a fine on me for a cock I had, and he
took five shillings off Molly for hitting a man.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Your evidence is not wanted. His own words are enough.
[_Stretching out his arms._] Have any of these gentlemen been living the
Christian life?

_All._ They have not.

_Johneen._ [_Coming in._] Ye'd best clear off now. I see the train
coming in to the station.

_Paddy Cockfight._ The police will find plenty to do in the village
before they come to us; that's one good job.

_Paul Ruttledge._ One moment. I have done trying the world I have left.
You have accused me of upsetting order by my free drinks, and I have
showed you that there is a more dreadful fermentation in the Sermon on
the Mount than in my beer-barrels. Christ thought it in the
irresponsibility of His omnipotence. [_Getting from his bin._] Charlie,
give me that cloak. [_He flings it back._

_Charlie Ward._ Aren't you going to punish them anyway?

_Paul Ruttledge._ No, no, from this out I would punish nobody but
myself.

     [_Some of the_ Tinkers _have gone out_.

_Charlie Ward._ We'd best be off while we can. Come along, Paul, Sibby's
gone.

     [_As they go out_ TOMMY THE SONG _is singing_,

  Down by the sally garden my love and I did stand,
  And on my leaning shoulder she laid her milk-white hand;
  She bade me take love easy, as the leaves grow on the tree,
  But I, being young and foolish, with her would not agree.

     [_All go out except_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, good-bye, Thomas; I don't suppose I'll see you
again. Use all I have; spend it on your children; I'll never want it.
[_To the others._] Will you come and join us? We will find rags for you
all. Perhaps you will give up that dream that is fading from you, and
come among the blind, homeless people; put off the threadbare clothes of
the Apostles and run naked for awhile. [_Is going out._

_Thomas Ruttledge._ You have nothing against me, have you, Paul?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, yes, I have; a little that I have said against all
these, and a worse thing than all, though it is not in the book.

_Thomas Ruttledge._ What is it?

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Looking back from the threshold._] You have begotten
fools.


CURTAIN.




ACT IV.


     Scene 1.--_Great door in the middle of the stage under a stone
     cross, with flights of steps leading to door. Enter_ CHARLIE WARD,
     PADDY COCKFIGHT, TOMMY THE SONG, _and_ SABINA SILVER. _They are
     supporting_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE, _who is bent and limping._

_Charlie Ward._ We must leave you here. The monks will take you in.
We're very sorry, Paul. It's a heartscald to us to leave you and you
know that, but what can we do? [_They lead_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _to steps._

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! that was a bad stitch! [_Gasps._] Take care now;
put me down gently.

_Sabina Silver._ Oh! can't we keep him with us anyway; he'll find no one
to care him as well as myself.

_Tommy the Song._ What way can you care him, Sibby? It's no way to have
him lying out on the roadside under guano bags, like ourselves, and the
rain coming down on him like it did last night. It's in hospital he'll
be for the next month.

_Charlie Ward._ We'd never leave you if you could even walk. If we have
to give you to the monks itself, we'd keep round the place to encourage
you, only for the last business. We'll have to put two counties at least
between us and Gortmore after what we're after doing.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Never mind, boys, they'll never insult a tinker again
in Gortmore as long as the town's a town.

_Charlie Ward._ Dear knows! it breaks my heart to think of the fine
times we had of it since you joined us. Why the months seemed like days.
And all the fine sprees we had together! Now you're gone from us we
might as well be jailed at once.

_Paddy Cockfight._ And how you took to the cocks! I believe you were a
better judge than myself. No one but you would ever have fancied that
black-winged cock--and he never met his match.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! well, I'm doubled up now like that old cock of
Andy Farrell's.

_Paddy Cockfight._ No, but you were the best warrant to set a snare that
ever I came across.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Sitting down with difficulty on the steps._] Yes; it
was a grand time we had, and I wouldn't take back a day of it; but it's
over now, I've hit my ribs against the earth and they're aching.

_Sabina Silver._ Oh! Paul, Paul, is it to leave you we must? And you
never once struck a kick or a blow on me all this time, not even and you
in pain with the rheumatism. [_A clock strikes inside._

_Charlie Ward._ There's the clock striking. The monks will be getting
up. We'd best be off after the others. I hear some noise inside; they'd
best not catch us here. I'll stop and pull the bell. Be off with you,
boys!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Good-bye, Sabina. Don't cry! you'll get another
husband.

_Sabina Silver._ I'll never lep the budget with another man; I swear it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Good-bye, Paddy. Good-bye, Tommy. My mother Earth will
have none of me and I will go look for my father that is in heaven.

_Paddy Cockfight._ Come along, Sibby.

     [_Takes her hand and hurries off._

_Charlie Ward._ [_Rings bell._] Are they sure to let you in, Paul? Have
you got your story ready?

_Paul Ruttledge._ No fear, they won't refuse a sick man. No one knows me
but Father Jerome, and he won't tell on me.

_Charlie Ward._ There's a step inside. I'll cut for it.

     [_He goes out. Paul is left sitting on steps._


     Scene 2.--_The crypt under the Monastery church. A small barred
     window high up in the wall, through which the cold dawn is
     breaking. Altar in a niche at the back of stage; there are seven
     unlighted candles on the altar. A little hanging lamp near the
     altar._ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _is lying on the altar steps. Friars are
     dancing slowly before him in the dim light_. FATHER ALOYSIUS _is
     leaning against a pillar_.

     _Some_ Friars _come in carrying lanterns_.

_First Friar._ What are they doing? Dancing?

_Second Friar._ I told you they were dancing, and you would not believe
me.

_First Friar._ What on earth are they doing it for?

_Third Friar._ I heard them saying Father Paul told them to do it if
they ever found him in a trance again. He told them it was a kind of
prayer and would bring joy down out of heaven, and make it easier for
him to preach.

_Second Friar._ How still he is lying; you would nearly think him to be
dead.

_A Friar._ It is just a twelvemonth to-day since he was in a trance like
this.

_Second Friar._ That was the time he gave his great preaching. I can't
blame those that went with him, for he all but persuaded me.

_First Friar._ They think he is going to preach again when he awakes,
that's why they are dancing. When he wakes one of them will go and call
the others.

_Third Friar._ We were all in danger when one so pious was led away.
It's five years he has been with us now, and no one ever went so quickly
from lay brother to novice, and novice to friar.

_First Friar._ The way he fasted too! The Superior bade me watch him at
meal times for fear he should starve himself.

_Third Friar._ He thought a great deal of Brother Paul then, but he
isn't so well pleased with him now.

_Second Friar._ What is Father Aloysius doing there? standing so quiet
and his eyes shut.

_Third Friar._ He is meditating. Didn't you hear Brother Paul gives
meditations of his own.

_First Friar._ Colman was telling me about that. He gives them a joyful
thought to fix their minds on. They must not let their minds stray to
anything else. They must follow that single thought and put everything
else behind them.

_Third Friar._ Colman fainted the other day when he was at his
meditation. He says it is a great labour to follow one thought always.

_Second Friar._ What do they do it for?

_First Friar._ To escape what they call the wandering of nature. They
say it was in the trance Brother Paul got the knowledge of it. He says
that if a man can only keep his mind on the one high thought he gets out
of time into eternity, and learns the truth for itself.

_Third Friar._ He calls that getting above law and number, and becoming
king and priest in one's own house.

_Second Friar._ A nice state of things it would be if every man was his
own priest and his own king.

_First Friar._ I wonder will he wake soon. I thought I saw him stir just
now. Father Aloysius, will he wake soon?

_Aloysius._ What did you say?

_First Friar._ Will he wake soon?

_Aloysius._ Yes, yes, he will wake very soon now.

_Second Friar._ What are they going to do now; are they going to dance?

_Third Friar._ He was too patient with him. He would have made short
work of any of us if we had gone so far.

_First Dancer._

  Nam, et si ambulavero in medio umbrae mortis,
  Non timebo mala, quoniam tu mecum es.

_First Friar._ They are singing the twenty-second Psalm. What madness to
sing!

_Second Dancer._

  Virga tua, et baculus tuus,
  Ipsa me consolata sunt.

_First Dancer._

  Parasti in conspectu meo mensam
  Adversus eos qui tribulant me.

_Second Dancer._

Impinguasti in oleo caput meum;
Et calix meus inebrians quam praeclarus est.

_Second Friar._ Here is the Superior. There'll be bad work now.

       *       *       *       *       *

     SUPERIOR _comes in_.

_Superior._ [_Holding up his hand._] Silence!

     [_They stop singing and dancing._

_First Dancer._ It's the Superior.

_Superior._ Stop this blasphemy! Leave the chapel at once! I will deal
with you by-and-by. [_Dancing_ Friars _go out_.

_Jerome._ [_Stooping over_ PAUL.] He has not wakened from the trance
yet.

_Aloysius._ [_Who still remains perfectly motionless._] Not yet, but he
will soon awake--Paul!

_Superior._ It is hardly worth while being angry with those poor fools
whose heads he has turned with his talk. [_Stoops and touches his
hand._] It is quite rigid. I will wait till he is alive again, there is
no use wasting words on a dead body.

_Jerome._ [_Stooping over him._] His eyes are beginning to quiver. Let
me be the first to speak to him. He may say some wild things when he
awakes, not knowing who is before him.

_Superior._ He must not preach. I must have his submission at once.

_Jerome._ I will do all I can with him. He is most likely to listen to
me. I was once his close friend.

_Superior._ Speak to him if you like, but entire submission is the only
thing I will accept. [_To the other_ Monks.] Come with me, we will leave
Father Jerome here to speak to him. [SUPERIOR _and_ Friars _go to the
door_.] Such desecration, such blasphemy. Remember, Father Jerome,
entire submission, and at once. [SUPERIOR _and_ Friars _go out_.

_Jerome._ Where are the rest of his friends, Father Aloysius? Bartley
and Colman ought to be with him when he is like this.

_Aloysius._ They are resting, because, when he has given his message,
they may never be able to rest again.

_Jerome._ [_Bending over him._] My poor Paul, this will wear him out;
see how thin he has grown!

_Aloysius._ He is hard upon his body. He does not care what happens to
his body.

_Jerome._ He was like this when he was a boy; some wild thought would
come on him, and he would not know day from night, he would forget even
to eat. It is a great pity he was so hard to himself; it is a pity he
had not always someone to look after him.

_Aloysius._ God is taking care of him; what could men like us do for
him? We cannot help him, it is he who helps us.

_Jerome._ [_Going on his knee and taking his hand._] He is awaking. Help
me to lift him up. [_They lift him into a chair._

_Aloysius._ I will go and call the others now.

_Jerome._ Do not let them come for a little time, I must speak to him
first.

_Aloysius._ I cannot keep them away long. One cannot know when the
words may be put in his mouth.

     [ALOYSIUS _goes out._ JEROME _stands by_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE, _holding his
     hand_.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Raising his head._] Ah, you are there, Jerome. I am
glad you are there. I could not get up to drive away the mouse that was
eating the wax that dropped from the candles. Have you driven it away?

_Jerome._ It is not evening now. It is almost morning. You were on your
knees praying for a great many hours, and then I think you fainted.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I don't think I was praying. I was among people, a
great many people, and it was very bright--I will remember presently.

_Jerome._ Do not try to remember. You are tired, you must be weak, you
must come and have food and rest.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I do not think I can rest. I think there is something
else I have to do, I forget what it is.

_Jerome._ I am afraid you are thinking of preaching again. You must not
preach. The Superior says you must not. He is very angry; I have never
seen him so angry. He will not allow you to preach again.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Did I ever preach?

_Jerome._ Yes. It was in the garden you got the trance last time. We
found you like this, and we lifted you to the bench under the yew tree,
and then you began to speak. You spoke about getting out of the body
while still alive, about getting away from law and number. All the
friars came to listen to you. We had never heard such preaching before,
but it was very like heresy.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Getting up._] Jerome, Jerome, I remember now where I
was. I was in a great round place, and a great crowd of things came
round me. I couldn't see them very clearly for a time, but some of them
struck me with their feet, hard feet like hoofs, and soft cat-like feet;
and some pecked me, and some bit me, and some clawed me. There were all
sorts of beasts and birds as far as I could see.

_Jerome._ Were they devils, Paul, were they the deadly sins?

_Paul Ruttledge._ I don't know, but I thought, and I don't know how the
thought came to me, that they were the part of mankind that is not
human; the part that builds up the things that keep the soul from God.

_Jerome._ That was a terrible vision.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I struggled and I struggled with them, and they heaped
themselves over me till I was unable to move hand or foot; and that went
on for a long, long time.

_Jerome._ [_Crossing himself._] God have mercy on us.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Then suddenly there came a bright light, and all in a
minute the beasts were gone, and I saw a great many angels riding upon
unicorns, white angels on white unicorns. They stood all round me, and
they cried out, "Brother Paul, go and preach; get up and preach, Brother
Paul." And then they laughed aloud, and the unicorns trampled the ground
as though the world were already falling in pieces.

_Jerome._ It was only a dream. Come with me. You will forget it when you
have had food and rest.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Looking at his arm._] It was there one of them
clawed me; one that looked at me with great heavy eyes.

_Jerome._ The Superior has been here; try and listen to me. He says you
must not preach.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Great heavy eyes and hard sharp claws.

_Jerome._ [_Putting his hands on his shoulders._] You must awake from
this. You must remember where you are. You are under rules. You must not
break the rules you are under. The brothers will be coming in to hear
you, you must not speak to them. The Superior has forbidden it.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Touching_ JEROME'S _hand_.] I have always been a great
trouble to you.

_Jerome._ You must go and submit to the Superior. Go and make your
submission now, for my sake. Think of what I have done for your sake.
Remember how I brought you in, and answered for you when you came here.
I did not tell about that wild business. I have done penance for that
deceit.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, you have always been good to me, but do not ask
me this. I have had other orders.

_Jerome._ Last time you preached the whole monastery was upset. The
Friars began to laugh suddenly in the middle of the night.

_Paul Ruttledge._ If I have been given certain truths to tell, I must
tell them at once before they slip away from me.

_Jerome._ I cannot understand your ideas; you tell them impossible
things. Things that are against the order of nature.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I have learned that one needs a religion so wholly
supernatural, that is so opposed to the order of nature that the world
can never capture it.

     [_Some_ Friars _come in. They carry green branches in their hands_.

_Paul Ruttledge._ They are coming. Will you stay and listen?

_Jerome._ I must not stay. I must not listen.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Help me over to the candles. I am weak, my knees are
weak. I shall be strong when the words come. I shall be able to teach.
[_He lights a taper at the hanging lamp and tries to light the candles
with a shaking hand. JEROME takes the taper from him and lights the
candles._] Why are you crying, Jerome?

_Jerome._ Because we that were friends are separated now. We shall never
be together again.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Never again? The love of God is a very terrible thing.

_Jerome._ I have done with meddling. I must leave you to authority now.
I must tell the Superior you will not obey. [_He goes out._

_First Friar._ Father Jerome had a very dark look going out.

_Second Friar._ He was shut up with the Superior this morning. I wonder
what they were talking about.

_First Friar._ I wonder if the Superior will mind our taking the
branches. They are only cut on Palm Sunday other years. What will he
tell us, I wonder? It seems as if he was going to tell us how to do some
great thing. Do you think he will teach us to do cures like the friars
used at Esker?

_Second Friar._ Those were great cures they did there, and they were not
strange men, but just the same as ourselves. I heard of a man went to
them dying on a cart, and he walked twenty miles home to Burren holding
the horses head.

_First Friar._ Maybe we'll be able to see visions the same as were seen
at Knock. It's a great wonder all that was seen and all that was done
there.

_Third Friar._ I was there one time, and the whole place was full of
crutches that had been thrown away by people that were cured. There was
a silver crutch there some rich man from America had sent as an offering
after getting his cure. Speak to him, Brother Colman. He seems to be in
some sort of a dream. Ask if he is going to speak to us now.

_Colman._ We are all here, Brother Paul.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Have you all been through your meditations? [_They all
gather round him._

_Bartley._ We have all tried; we have done our best; but it is hard to
keep our mind on the one thing for long.

_Paul Ruttledge._ "He ascended into heaven." Have you meditated upon
that? Did you reject all earthly images that came into your mind till
the light began to gather?

_Third Friar._ I could not fix my mind well. When I put out one thought
others came rushing in.

_Colman._ When I was meditating, the inside of my head suddenly became
all on fire.

_Aloysius._ While I was meditating I felt a spout of fire going up
between my shoulders.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That is the way it begins. You are ready now to hear
the truth. Now I can give you the message that has come to me. Stand
here at either side of the altar. Brother Colman, come beside me here.
Lay down your palm branches before this altar; you have brought them as
a sign that the walls are beginning to be broken up, that we are going
back to the joy of the green earth. [_Goes up to the candles and
speaks._] Et calix meus inebrians quam praeclarus est. For a long time
after their making men and women wandered here and there, half blind
from the drunkenness of Eternity; they had not yet forgotten that the
green Earth was the Love of God, and that all Life was the Will of God,
and so they wept and laughed and hated according to the impulse of their
hearts. [_He takes up the green boughs and presses them to his breast._]
They gathered the green Earth to their breasts and their lips, as I
gather these boughs to mine, in what they believed would be an eternal
kiss. [_He remains a little while silent._

_Second Friar._ I see a light about his head.

_Third Friar._ I wonder if he has seen God.

_Paul Ruttledge._ It was then that the temptation began. Not only the
Serpent who goes upon his belly, but all the animal spirits that have
loved things better than life, came out of their holes and began to
whisper. The men and women listened to them, and because when they had
lived according to the joyful Will of God in mother wit and natural
kindness, they sometimes did one another an injury, they thought that it
would be better to be safe than to be blessèd, they made the Laws. The
Laws were the first sin. They were the first mouthful of the apple, the
moment man had made them he began to die; we must put out the Laws as I
put out this candle.

     [_He puts out the candle with an extinguisher, still holding the
     boughs with his left hand. Two orthodox Friars have come in._

_First Orthodox Friar._ You had better go for the Superior.

_Second Orthodox Friar._ I must stop and listen.

     [_The First Orthodox Friar listens for a minute or two and then
     goes out._

_Paul Ruttledge._ And when they had lived amidst the green Earth that is
the Love of God, they were sometimes wetted by the rain, and sometimes
cold and hungry, and sometimes alone from one another; they thought it
would be better to be comfortable than to be blessèd. They began to
build big houses and big towns. They grew wealthy and they sat
chattering at their doors; and the embrace that was to have been
eternal ended, lips and hands were parted. [_He lets the boughs slip out
of his arms._] We must put out the towns as I put out this candle.
[_Puts out another candle._

_A Friar._ Yes, yes, we must uproot the towns.

_Paul Ruttledge._ But that is not all, for man created a worse thing,
yes, a worse defiance against God. [_The_ Friars _groan_.] God put
holiness into everything that lives, for everything that desires is full
of His Will, and everything that is beautiful is full of His Love; but
man grew timid because it had been hard to find his way amongst so much
holiness, and though God had made all time holy, man said that only the
day on which God rested from life was holy, and though God had made all
places holy, man said, "no place but this place that I put pillars and
walls about is holy, this place where I rest from life"; and in this and
like ways he built up the Church. We must destroy the Church, we must
put it out as I put out this candle. [_Puts out another candle._

_Friars._ [_Clasping one another's hands._] He is right, he is right.
The Church must be destroyed. [_The_ SUPERIOR _comes in_.

_First Friar._ Here is the Superior.

_A Friar._ He has been saying----

_Superior._ Hush! I will hear him to the end.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That is not all. These things may be accomplished and
yet nothing be accomplished. The Christian's business is not reformation
but revelation, and the only labours he can put his hand to can never be
accomplished in Time. He must so live that all things shall pass away.
[_He stands silent for a moment and then cries, lifting his hand above
his head._] Give me wine out of thy pitchers; oh, God, how splendid is
my cup of drunkenness. We must become blind, and deaf, and dizzy. We
must get rid of everything that is not measureless eternal life. We
must put out hope as I put out this candle. [_Puts out a candle._] And
memory as I put out this candle. [_As before._] And thought, the waster
of Life, as I put out this candle. [_As before._] And at last we must
put out the light of the Sun and of the Moon, and all the light of the
World and the World itself. [_He now puts out the last candle, the
chapel is very dark. The only light is the faint light of morning coming
through the window._] We must destroy the World; we must destroy
everything that has Law and Number, for where there is nothing, there is
God.

     [_The_ SUPERIOR _comes forward. One of_ PAUL'S Friars _makes as if to
     speak to him. The_ SUPERIOR _strikes at him with the back of his
     hand_.

_Superior._ [_To_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE.] Get out of this, rebel, blasphemous
rebel!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Do as you like to me, but you cannot silence my
thoughts. I learned them from Jesus Christ, who made a terrible joy,
and sent it to overturn governments, and all settled order.

     [PAUL'S Friars _rush to save him from the_ SUPERIOR.

_Paul Ruttledge._ There is no need for violence. I am ready to go.

_Colman._ [_Taking his hand._] I will go with you.

_Aloysius._ I will go with you too.

_Several other Friars._ And I, and I, and I.

_Superior._ Whoever goes with this heretic goes straight into the pit.

_Bartley._ Do not leave us behind you. Let us go with you.

_Colman._ Teach us! teach us! we will help you to teach others.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Let me go alone, the one more, the one nearer
falsehood.

_Bartley._ We will go with you! We will go with you! We must go where we
can hear your voice.

_A Friar._ [_Who stands behind the_ SUPERIOR.] God is making him speak
against himself.

_Paul Ruttledge._ No, the time has not come for you. You would be
thinking of your food at midday and listening for the bells at prayer
time. You have not yet heard the voices and seen the faces.

_Superior._ A miracle! God is making the heretic speak against himself.
Listen to him!

_Aloysius._ We will not stay behind, we will go with you.

_Bartley._ We cannot live without hearing you!

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am led by hands that are colder than ice and harder
than diamonds. They will lead me where there will be hard thoughts of me
in the hearts of all that love me, and there will be a fire in my heart
that will make it as bare as the wilderness.

_Aloysius._ We will go with you. We too will take those hands that are
colder than ice and harder than diamonds.

_Several Monks._ We too! we too!

_Patrick._ Bring us to the hands that are colder than ice and harder
than diamonds.

_Other Monks._ Pull them away! pull them away from him!

     [_They are about to seize the Monks who are with_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE.

_Superior._ [_Going between them._] Back! back! I will have no scuffling
here. Let the devil take his children if he has a mind to. God will call
His own.

     [_The_ Monks _fall back_. SUPERIOR _goes up to altar, takes the cross
     from it and turns, standing on the steps_.

_Superior._ Father Aloysius, come to me here. [ALOYSIUS _takes_ PAUL
RUTTLEDGE'S _hand_.] Father Bartley, Father Colman. [_They go nearer to_
PAUL RUTTLEDGE.] Father Patrick! [_A_ Friar _comes towards him_.] Kneel
down! [FATHER PATRICK _kneels_.] Father Clement, Father Nestor, Father
James ... leave the heretic--you are on the very edge of the pit. Your
shoes are growing red hot.

_A Friar._ I am afraid, I am afraid. [_He kneels._

_Superior._ Kneel down; return to your God. [_Several_ Monks _kneel_.

_Colman._ They have deserted us.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Many will forsake the truth before the world is pulled
down. [_Stretching out his arms over his head._] I pulled down my own
house, now I go out to pull down the world.

_Superior._ Strip off those holy habits.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Taking off his habit._] One by one I am plucking off
the rags and tatters of the world.




ACT V.


     Scene: _Smooth level grass near the Shannon. Ecclesiastical ruins,
     a part of which have been roofed in. Rocky plain in the distance,
     with a river._ FATHER COLMAN _sorting some bundles of osiers_.

     ALOYSIUS _enters with an empty bag_.

_Colman._ You are the first to come back Aloysius. Where is Brother
Bartley?

_Aloysius._ He parted from me at the cross roads and went on to preach
at Shanaglish. He should soon be back now.

_Colman._ Have you anything in the bag?

_Aloysius._ Nothing. [_Throws the bag down._] It doesn't seem as if our
luck was growing. We have but food enough to last till to-morrow. We
have hardly that. The rats from the river got at the few potatoes I
gathered from the farmers at Lisheen last week, in the corner where they
were.

_Colman._ This is the first day you got nothing at all. Maybe you didn't
ask the right way.

_Aloysius._ I asked for alms for the sake of the love of God. But the
first place where I asked it, the man of the house was giving me a
handful of meal, and the woman came and called out that we were serving
the devil in the name of God, and she drove me from the door.

_Colman._ It is since the priests preached against us they say that. Did
you go on to Lisheen. They used always to treat us well there.

_Aloysius._ I did, but I got on no better there.

_Colman._ That is a wonder, after the woman that had the jaundice being
cured with prayers by Brother Paul.

_Aloysius._ That's just it. If he did cure her, they say the two best of
her husband's bullocks died of the blackwater the next day, and he was
no way thankful to us after that.

_Colman._ Did you try the houses along the bog road?

_Aloysius._ I did, and the children coming back from school called out
after me and asked who was it did away with the widow Cloran's cow.

_Colman._ The widow Cloran's cow?

_Aloysius._ That was the cow that died after grazing in the ruins here.

_Colman._ If it did, it was because of an old boot it picked up and ate,
and that never belonged to us.

_Aloysius._ I wish we had something ourselves to eat. They should be
sitting down to their dinner in the monastery now. They will be having a
good dinner to-day to carry them over the fast to-morrow.

_Colman._ I am thinking sometimes, Brother Paul should give more thought
to us than he does. It is all very well for him, he is so taken up with
his thoughts and his visions he doesn't know if he is full or fasting.

_Aloysius._ He has such holy thoughts and visions no one would like to
trouble him. He ought not to be in the world at all, or to do the
world's work.

_Colman._ So long as he is in the world, he must give some thought to
it. There must be something wrong in the way he is doing things now. I
thought he would have had half Ireland with him by this time with his
great preaching, but someway when he preaches to the people, they don't
seem to mind him much.

_Aloysius._ He is too far above them; they have not education to
understand him.

_Colman._ They understand me well enough when I give my mind to it. But
it is harder to preach now than it was in the monastery. We had
something to offer then; absolution here, and heaven after.

_Aloysius._ Isn't it enough for them to hear that the kingdom of heaven
is within them, and that if they do the right meditations----

_Colman._ What can poor people that have their own troubles on them get
from a few words like that they hear at a cross road or a market, and
the wind maybe blowing them away? If we could gather them together
now.... Look, Aloysius, at these sally rods; I have a plan in my mind
about them.

     [_He has stuck some of the rods in the ground, and begins weaving
     others through them._

_Aloysius._ Are you going to make baskets like you did in the monastery
schools?

_Colman._ We must make something if we are to live. But it is more than
that I was thinking of; we might coax some of the youngsters to come and
learn the basket making; it would make them take to us better if we
could put them in the way of earning a few pence.

_Aloysius._ [_Taking up some of the osiers and beginning to twist
them._] That might be a good way to come at them; they could work
through the day, and at evening we could tell them how to repeat the
words till the light comes inside their heads. But would Paul think well
of it? He is more for pulling down than building up.

_Colman._ When I explain it to him I am sure he will think well of it;
he can't go on for ever without anyone to listen to him.

_Aloysius._ I suppose not, and with no way of living. But I don't know,
I'm afraid he won't like it.

_Colman._ Hush! Here he is coming.

_Aloysius._ If one had a plan now for doing some destruction----

_Colman._ Hush! don't you see there is somebody with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PAUL RUTTLEDGE _comes in with_ CHARLIE WARD.

_Paul Ruttledge._ This is Charlie Ward, my old friend.

_Aloysius._ The Charlie Ward you lived on the roads with?

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, when I went looking for the favour of my hard
mother, Earth, he helped me. He is her good child and she loves him.

_Colman._ He is welcome. How did he find you out?

_Paul Ruttledge._ I don't know. How did you find me out, Charlie?

_Charlie Ward._ Oh, I didn't lose sight of you so much as you thought. I
had to stop away from Gortmore a good while after we left you at the
gate, but I sent Paddy Cockfight one time to get news, and he mended
cans for the laundry of the monastery, and they told him you were well
again, and a monk as good as the rest. But a while ago I got word there
was a monk had gone near to break up the whole monastery with his talk
and his piety, and I said to myself, "That's Paul!" And then I heard
there was a monk had been driven out for not keeping the rules, and I
said to myself, "That's Paul!" And the other day when what's left of us
came to Athlone, I heard talk of some disfrocked monks that were
upsetting the whole neighbourhood, and I said, "That's Paul." To Sabina
Silver I said that. "That merry chap Paul," I said.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I'm afraid you have a very bad opinion of me, Charlie.
Well, maybe I earned it.

_Aloysius._ You cannot know much of him if you have a bad opinion of
him. He will be made a saint some day.

_Charlie Ward._ He will, if there's such a thing as a saint of mischief.

_Paul Ruttledge._ A saint of mischief? Well, why not that as well as
another? He would upset all the beehives, he would throw them into the
market-place. Sit down now, Charlie, and eat a bit with us.

_Colman._ You are welcome, indeed, to all we can give you, but we have
not a bit of food that is worth offering you. Aloysius got nothing at
all in the villages to-day, Brother Paul. The people are getting cross.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Well, sit down, anyway. The country people liked me
well enough once, there was no man they liked so much as myself when I
gave them drink for nothing. Didn't they, Charlie?

_Charlie Ward._ Oh, that was a great time. They were lying thick about
the roads. I'll be thinking of it to my dying day.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I have given them another kind of drink now.

_Charlie Ward._ What sort of a drink is that?

_Paul Ruttledge._ We have rolled a great barrel out of a cellar that is
under the earth. We have rolled it right into the midst of them. [_He
moves his hand about as if he were moving a barrel._] It's heavy, and
when they have drunk what is in it, I would like to see the man that
would be their master.

_Charlie Ward._ That would be a great drink, but I wouldn't be sure that
you're in earnest.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Colman and Aloysius will tell you all about it. It was
made in a good still, the barley was grown in a field that's down under
the earth.

_Charlie Ward._ That's likely enough. I often heard of places like that.

_Paul Ruttledge._ And when they have drunk from my barrel, they will
break open the door, they will put law and number under their two feet;
and they will have a hot palm and a cold palm, for they will put down
the moon and the sun with their two hands.

_Charlie Ward._ There's no mistake but you're the same Paul still; nice
and plain and simple, only for your hard talk. And what about the
rheumatism? It's hardly you got through that fit you had, and you don't
look as if much hardship would agree with you now.

_Aloysius._ He does not, indeed, and if he doesn't kill himself one way
he will another. Wait now till I tell you the way he is living. I don't
think he tasted bit or sup to-day, and all he had last night was a
couple of dry potatoes.

_Charlie Ward._ Is that so? [_Takes_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE'S _arm_.] You haven't
much more flesh on you than a crane in moonlight. They don't seem to
have much notion of minding you here, you that were reared soft. It
would be better for you to come back to us; bad as our lodging is,
there'd be a bit in the pot for you and Sabina to care you. It's she
would give you a good welcome.

_Colman._ [_Starting up._] We can mind him well enough here. I have a
plan. We haven't been getting on the way we ought with the people. It's
no way to be getting on with people to be asking things of them always,
they have no opinion at all of us seeing us the way we are. They have no
notion of the respect they should show to Brother Paul, and the way all
the Brothers used to be listening to his preaching, and the townspeople
as well. And I, myself, the time I preached in Dublin----

_Aloysius._ Yes, indeed, Paul, think of the great crowds used to come
when you preached in the Abbey church, and all the money that was
gathered that time of the Mission.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, I used to like once to see all the faces looking
up at me. But now all that is gone from me. Now I think it is enough to
be a witness for the truth, and to think the thoughts I like. God will
bring the people to me. He will make of my silence a great wind that
will shatter the ships of the world.

_Colman._ That is all very well, but the people are not coming.

_Aloysius._ And more than that, they are driving us away from their
doors now, Paul.

_Charlie Ward._ The way they do to us. But Paul was not born on the
roads. [_Lights his pipe._

_Colman._ It's no use stopping waiting for a wind; if we have anything
to say that's worth the people listening to, we must bring them to hear
it one way or another. Now, it is what I was saying to Aloysius, we must
begin teaching them to make things, they never had the chance of any
instruction of the sort here.

_Paul Ruttledge._ To make things? This sort of things? [_Takes the
half-made basket from_ COLMAN.

_Colman._ Those and other things, we got a good training in the old
days. And we'll get a grant from the Technical Board. The Board pays up
to four hundred pounds to some of its instructors.

_Paul Ruttledge._ And then?

_Aloysius._ Oh, then we'll sell all the things we make. I'm sure we'll
get a market for them.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, I understand; you will sell them. And what about
the dividing of the money? You will need to make laws about that.

_Colman._ Of course; we will have to make rules, and to pay according to
work.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, we will grow quite rich in time. What are we to do
then? we can't go on living in this ruin?

_Colman._ Of course not. We'll build workshops and houses for those who
come to work from a distance, good houses, slated, not thatched.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Turning to_ ALOYSIUS _and_ CHARLIE WARD.] Yes, you see
his plan. To gather the people together, to build houses for them; to
make them rich too, and to keep their money safe. And the Kingdom of God
too? What about that?

_Colman._ Oh, I'm just coming to that. They will think so much more of
our teaching when we have got them under our influence by other things.
Of course we will teach them their meditations, and give them a regular
religious life. We must settle out some little place for them to pray
in--there's a high gable over there where we could hang a bell----

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh yes, I understand. You would weave them together
like this [_weaves the osiers in and out_], you would add one thing to
another, laws and money and church and bells, till you had got
everything back again that you have escaped from. But it is my business
to tear things asunder like this [_tears pieces from the basket_], and
this, and this----

_Aloysius._ I told him you'd never agree to it. He ought to have known
that himself.

_Colman._ We must have something to offer the people.

_Paul Ruttledge._ You say that because you got nothing to-day. Aloysius
has got nothing in his sack. [_Taking sack and turning it upside down._]
It is quite empty. Every religious teacher before me has offered
something to his followers, but I offer them nothing. [_Plunging his arm
down into the sack._] My sack is quite empty. I will never dip my hand
into nature's full sack of illusions; I am tired of that old conjuring
bag. [_He walks up and down muttering._

_Charlie Ward._ [_To_ COLMAN.] You may as well give up trying to settle
him down to anything. He was a tinker once, and he'll be a tinker
always; he has got the wandering into his blood. Will you come back to
the roads, Paul, to your old friends and to Sabina?

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Sitting down beside him._] Ah, my old friends, they
were very kind to me; but these friends too are very kind to me.

_Charlie Ward._ Well, come and see them anyway; they'll be glad to see
you, those that are left of us.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Those that are left of you? Where are the others?

_Charlie Ward._ Some are dead, and some are jailed, and some are on the
roads here and there. Sabina is with us always, and Johneen is a great
hand with the tools now, but Tommy the Song----

_Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, Tommy the Song, does he pray still? He was
beginning to pray. Did he ever get an answer?

_Charlie Ward._ Well, I don't know about an answer, but I believe he
heard something one night beside an old thorn tree, some sort of a voice
it was.

_Paul Ruttledge._ A voice? What did it say to him? Did he see anything?
We have learned too much, our minds are like troubled water--we get
nothing but broken images. He who knew nothing may have seen all. Is he
praying still?

_Charlie Ward._ If he is, it's in Galway gaol he's praying, with or
without a thorn tree.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Did he tell no one what the voice said to him?

_Charlie Ward._ He did not, unless he might have told Johneen or some
other one.

_Paul Ruttledge._ I will go with you and see them. [_Gets up._

_Colman._ [_To_ ALOYSIUS, _with whom he has been whispering_.] Take care,
but if he goes back to his old friends, he'll stop with them and leave
us.

_Aloysius._ [_Putting his hand on_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE'S _arm_.] Don't go,
Brother Paul, till I talk to you awhile.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Do you want me? Well, Charlie, I will stay here, I
won't go; but bring all the rest to see me, I want to ask them about
that vision.

_Charlie Ward._ I'll bring one of them, anyway. [_Exit._

_Aloysius._ Brother Paul, it is what I am thinking; now the tinkers have
come back to you, you could begin to gather a sort of an army; you can't
fight your battle without an army. They could call to the other tinkers,
and the tramps and the beggars, and the sieve-makers and all the
wandering people. It would be a great army.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, that would be a great army, a great wandering
army.

_Aloysius._ The people would be afraid to refuse us then; we would march
on----

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, we could march on. We could march on the towns,
and we could break up all settled order; we could bring back the old
joyful, dangerous, individual life. We would have banners, we would each
have a banner, banners with angels upon them--we will march upon the
world with banners----

_Colman._ We would not be in want of food then, we could take all we
wanted.

_Aloysius._ We could take all we wanted, we would be too many to put in
gaol; all the people would join us in the end; you would be able to
persuade them all, Brother Paul, you would be their leader; we would
make great stores of food----

_Paul Ruttledge._ We will have one great banner that will go in front,
it will take two men to carry it, and on it we will have Laughter, with
his iron claws and his wings of brass and his eyes like sapphires----

_Aloysius._ That will be the banner for the front, we will have
different troops, we will have captains to organize them, to give them
orders----

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Standing up._] To organize? That is to bring in law
and number? Organize--organize--that is how all the mischief has been
done. I was forgetting, we cannot destroy the world with armies, it is
inside our minds that it must be destroyed, it must be consumed in a
moment inside our minds. God will accomplish his last judgment, first in
one man's mind and then in another. He is always planning last
judgments. And yet it takes a long time, and that is why he laments in
the wind and in the reeds and in the cries of the curlews.

_Colman._ I think we had better go down to the river and see are there
any eels on the lines we set. We must find something for supper. It is
near sunset; see how the crows are flying home.

_Paul Ruttledge._ [_Looking up._] The crows are my darlings! I like
their harsh merriment better than those sad cries of the wind and the
rushes. Look at them, they are tossing about like witches, tossing about
on the wind, drunk with the wind.

_Colman._ Well, I'll go look at the lines, anyhow. Put turf on the fire,
Aloysius; Bartley should soon be home from Shanaglish.

_Aloysius._ I wonder why he isn't home by this. I'm uneasy till I see
him, after the way the people treated me to-day. [_Shades his eyes to
look out._] Here he is! He's running!

_Colman._ [_Coming over to him._] He is running hard! He must be in some
danger----

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Enter_ BARTLEY _out of breath_.

_Bartley._ Run, run, come away, there's not a minute to lose.

_Colman._ What is the matter? what has happened?

_Bartley._ The people are coming up the road! They attacked me in the
market! They followed me, they are on the road. I slipped away across
the fields. Run, run!

_Colman._ What is it? What are they going to do to us?

_Bartley._ You would know that if you saw them! They have stones and
sticks. Raging they are, and calling for our lives. They say we brought
witchcraft and ill-luck on the place! Come to the boat, it's in the
rushes; they won't see us, we'll get to the island. Hurry, hurry! [_He
runs out._

_Aloysius._ Come, Brother Paul, hurry, hurry!

_Paul Ruttledge._ I am going to stay.

_Bartley._ They will kill us if we stay! Brother Colman said they have
stones and sticks; I think I hear them!

_Paul Ruttledge._ You are afraid because you have been shut up so long.
I am not afraid because I have lived upon the roads, where one is ready
for anything that may happen. One has to learn that, like any other
thing. I will stay.

_Aloysius._ He wants the crown!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Where is Bartley?

_Colman._ He is gone. Come, you must go too, we can't leave you here.
You have too much to do to throw your life away, we have all too much to
do.

_Paul Ruttledge._ No, no. There is nothing to do; I am going to stay.

_Aloysius._ I will stay with you. [_Takes his hand._

_Paul Ruttledge._ Death is the last adventure, the first perfect joy,
for at death the soul comes into possession of itself, and returns to
the joy that made it. [_A great shout outside._

_Colman._ [_Seizing ALOYSIUS._] Come, come, Aloysius! come, Paul! We
haven't a moment, here they are. [_Drags_ ALOYSIUS _away_.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Good-bye, Aloysius, good-bye, Colman. Keep a pick
going at the foundations of the world.

     [COLMAN _and_ ALOYSIUS _run on_.

_One of the Mob outside._ They are here in the ruins!

_Another Voice._ This way! This way!

_Paul Ruttledge._ I will not go. I have a little reason for staying, but
no reason is too little to be the foundation of martyrdom. People have
been martyred for all kinds of reasons, and my reason that is not worth
a rush will do as well as any other. [_Looks round._] Ah! they are gone.
A little reason, a little reason. I have entered into the second
freedom--the irresponsibility of the saints.

_Sings._

  Parasti in conspectu meo mensam
  Adversus eos qui tribulant me.
  Impinguasti in oleo caput meum,
  Et calix meus inebrians quam praeclarus est.

    [People _rush in with sticks uplifted._

_One of the Mob._ Where are the heretics?

_Another._ We'll make an end of their witchcraft!

_Another._ Here is the worst of them!

_Another._ Give me back my cattle you put the sickness on!

_Another._ We'll have no witchcraft here! Drive away the unfrocked
priest!

_Another._ Make an end of him when we have the chance!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, make an end of me. I have tried hard to live a
good life; give me a good death now.

_One of the Crowd._ Quick, don't give him time to put the evil eye on
us!

     [_They rush at him. His hands are seen swaying about above the
     crowd._

_Paul Ruttledge._ I go to the invisible heart of flame!

_One of the Crowd._ Throw him there now! Where are the others?

_Another._ They must be among the rocks.

_Another._ They are not; they are gone down the road!

_Another._ I tell you it's in the rocks they are! It's in the rocks
they're hiding!

_Another._ They are not; they couldn't run in the rocks; they're running
down the road.

_Several Voices._ They're on the road; they're on the road.

     [_They all rush out, leaving_ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _lying on the ground. It
     grows darker_. FATHERS COLMAN _and_ ALOYSIUS _creep up_.

_Colman._ Paul, Paul, come; we have still time to get to the boat.

_Aloysius._ Oh! they have killed him; there is a wound in his neck! Oh!
he has been the first of us to get the crown!

_Colman._ There are voices! They must be coming back! Come to the boat,
maybe we can bury him to-morrow!

     [_They go out._ PAUL RUTTLEDGE _half rises and sinks back_.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _Enter_ CHARLIE WARD _and_ SABINA SILVER.

_Charlie Ward._ They have done for him. I thought they would.

_Sabina Silver._ Oh, Paul, I never thought to find you like this! He's
not dead; he'll come round yet.

_Charlie Ward._ [_Opens his shirt and puts in his hand on his heart._]
Paul!

_Paul Ruttledge._ Ah! Charlie, give me the soldering iron--no, bring me
the lap anvil--I'm as good a tinker as any of you.

_Charlie Ward._ He thinks he's back on the roads with us! He is done
for.

_Sabina Silver._ I knew he'd have to come back to me to die after all;
it's a lonesome thing to die among strangers.

_Paul Ruttledge._ That is right, that is right, take me up in your
brazen claws. But no--no--I will not go out beyond Saturn into the
dark. Take me down--down to that field under the earth, under the roots
of the grave.

_Sabina Silver._ I don't know what he is saying. I never could
understand his talk.

_Paul Ruttledge._ O plunge me into the wine barrel, into the wine barrel
of God.

_Sabina Silver._ Won't you speak to me, Paul? Don't you know me? I am
Sibby; don't you remember me, Sibby, your wife?

_Charlie Ward._ He sees you now; I think he knows you.

     [PAUL RUTTLEDGE _has raised himself on his elbow and is looking at_
     SABINA SILVER.

_Sabina Silver._ He knows me. I was sure he would know me.

_Paul Ruttledge._ Colman, Colman, remember always where there is nothing
there is God. [_He sinks down again._

_One of the Crowd._ [_Coming back with two or three others._] I knew
they must be in the rocks.

_Charlie Ward._ Well, he's gone! There'll soon be none of us left at
all. And I never knew what it was he did that brought him to us.

_Sabina Silver._ Oh, Paul, Paul!

     [_Begins to keen very low, swaying herself to and fro._

_One of the Crowd._ [_To_ CHARLIE WARD.] Was he a friend of yours?

_Charlie Ward._ He was, indeed. I must do what I can for him now.

_One of the Crowd._ That's natural, that's natural. It's a pity they did
it. They'd best have left him alone. We'd best be going back to the
town.

     [SABINA SILVER _raises the keen louder. The_ Strangers _and_ CHARLIE
     WARD _take off their hats._]
